;
;
;Ulitimate Civ II - Civilopedia Descriptions Text File -- Copyright (c) 1997 MicroProse Software, Inc. 
;
;This file contains the descriptions of all the Civilization Advances, City Improvements, Wonders of
;the World, Units, and Game Concepts displayed in the Civilopedia. It is designed to be adaptable to
;conform to customized scenarios by the replacing existing text with scenario-specific text.
;
;PLEASE MAKE A COPY OF THE ORIGINAL TEXT FILE BEFORE YOU MAKE ANY CHANGES!
;
;
;

@ADVANCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: This section consists (verbatim) of the following files from the original Civilopedia, ;strung together to make one contiguous section: ADVANC1.PDE, ADVANC2.PDE, ADVANC3.PDE,
;and ADVANC4.PDE. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Amphibious Warfare will be the 55'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@ADVANCE_INDEX
0,			; Interceptors I
1,			; Interceptors II
2,			; Interceptors III
3,			; Escort Fighters I
4,			; Escort Fighters II
-1,			; NOT USED (Automobile)
6,			; Escort Fighters III
-1,			; NOT USED (Bridge Building)
8,			; Cadillac of the Skies
9,			; 1940s Tech I
10,			; Bomber Destroyers I
11,			; Bomber Destroyers II
12,			; Interceptors IV
13,			; Night Fighters I
14,			; Night Fighters II
15,			; The Grand Alliance
16,			; Night Fighters III
17,			; Advanced Radar I
-1,			; NOT USED (Construction)
19,			; Advanced Radar II
20,			; Engines I
-1,			; NOT USED (Democracy)
22,			; Engines II
23,			; Engines III
-1,			; NOT USED (Electronics)
25,			; Jabo I
26,			; Jabo II
27,			; Jabo III
28,			; Engines IV
29,			; Experimental Design
30,			; Volksjäger
-1,			; NOT USED (Fundamentalism)
32,			; Centrifugal-Flow Engine
33,			; Axial-Flow Compressor
-1,			; NOT USED (Guerrilla Warfare)
-1,			; NOT USED (Gunpowder)
36,			; Jet Fighters
37,			; The Third Reich
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER (Invention)
39,			; Jet Bombers I
40,			; Jet Bombers II
41,			; Wunderwaffe Program
42,			; Pulse-Jet Engines
43,			; Vergeltungswaffen 1
44,			; Rocketry
45,			; Vergeltungswaffen 2
46,			; Strategic Bombers I
47,			; Strategic Bombers II
48,			; Strategic Bombers III
49,			; Window
50,			; Tactical Bombers I
51,			; Tactical Bombers II
52,			; Tactical Bombers III
53,			; Rocket Fighters
-1,			; NOT USED (Monarchy)
55,			; 1940s Tech II
56,			; 1940s Tech III
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Navigation)
58,			; Jägernotprogramm
59,			; Wilde Sau
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Philosophy)
61,			; Industry I
62,			; Industry II
63,			; Industry III
64,			; Fuel Production I
65,			; Fuel Production II
-1,			; NOT USED (Radio)
-1,			; NOT USED (Railroad)
68,			; Fuel Production III
71,			; War Economy
70,			; Rationing
71,			; The Axis Powers
72,			; Jägerstab
73,			; Foggia Airfields
74,			; Operation Overlord Prep.
75,			; Operation Neptune
76,			; Vistula-Oder Offensive
77,			; Tuskeegee Airmen
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Steam Engine)
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Steel)
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Superconductor)
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Tactics)
82,			; 1940s Tech IV
83,			; Proximity Fuses
84,			; Aircraft Prototypes
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (University)
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (Warrior Code)
-1,			; SAVE FOR LATER USE (The Wheel)
88,			; Advanced Radar III
89,			; Delays
90,			; Tactics I
91,			; Tactics II
92,			; Tactics III
93,			; Roam at Will
94,			; Long-Range Escorts Needed
95,			; Albert Speer's Death
96,			; Political Support I
97,			; Political Support II
98,			; Political Support III
99,			; Political Support IV
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Interceptors I
Interceptor aircraft are designed to attack enemy bombers.  They fire medium ammo.  They tend to have higher reaction stats against bombers and can attack up to three times per turn.  Researching better interceptor technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@Interceptors II
Interceptor aircraft are designed to attack enemy bombers.  They fire medium ammo.  They tend to have higher reaction stats against bombers and can attack up to three times per turn.  Researching better interceptor technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@Interceptors III
Interceptor aircraft are designed to attack enemy bombers.  They fire medium ammo.  They tend to have higher reaction stats against bombers and can attack up to three times per turn.  Researching better interceptor technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@Escort Fighters I
Escort aircraft are meant to stack on top of bombers and other aircraft that have weaker defensive stats.  They fire light ammo.  Escorts can typically attack twice per turn.  They tend to have good reactive attacks vs. fighters.  Researching better escort technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@Escort Fighters II
Escort aircraft are meant to stack on top of bombers and other aircraft that have weaker defensive stats.  They fire light ammo.  Escorts can typically attack twice per turn.  They tend to have good reactive attacks vs. fighters.  Researching better escort technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@NOT USED (Automobile)

@@Escort Fighters III
Escort aircraft are meant to stack on top of bombers and other aircraft that have weaker defensive stats.  They fire light ammo.  Escorts can typically attack twice per turn.  They tend to have good reactive attacks vs. fighters.  Researching better escort technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@NOT USED (Bridge Building)

@@Cadillac of the Skies
This technology allows the P-51D Mustang, "The Cadillac of the Skies."  Across the globe in Japanese POW camp, a little boy is losing his mind right now.

@@1940s Tech I
Required to make the happiness improvements work correctly.

@@Bomber Destroyers I
Allows bomber destroyer aircraft that are slow and cumbersome but carry powerful air-to-air rockets that can severely damage bomber formations.  Researching better bomber destroyers will allow for models with increased range and speed.

@@Bomber Destroyers II
Allows bomber destroyer aircraft that are slow and cumbersome but carry powerful air-to-air rockets that can severely damage bomber formations.  Researching better bomber destroyers will allow for models with increased range and speed.

@@Interceptors IV
Interceptor aircraft are designed to attack enemy bombers.  They tend to have higher reaction stats against bombers and can attack up to three times per turn.  Researching better interceptor technologies will allow models with increased speed, range, and reactive attacks.

@@Night Fighters I
Researching better night fighter aircraft not only allows for units with better speed and range, but it also increases radar efficiencies, assuming you have a technological edge over your opponent.

@@Night Fighters II
Researching better night fighter aircraft not only allows for units with better speed and range, but it also increases radar efficiencies, assuming you have a technological edge over your opponent.

@@The Grand Alliance
“I believe that the time of the grand alliance will come. . . . Today, communism does not represent such a danger to the Empire. Today, the greatest menace to the British Empire is German Nazism, with its idea of Berlin's global hegemony. That is why at the present time, I spare no effort in the struggle against Hitler.” -- Winston Churchill

@@Night Fighters III
Researching better night fighter aircraft not only allows for units with better speed and range, but it also increases radar efficiencies, assuming you have a technological edge over your opponent.

@@Advanced Radar I
Increases effectiveness of radar sets by allowing them to detect aircraft more accurately and at longer range.

@@NOT USED (Construction)

@@Advanced Radar II
Increases effectiveness of radar sets by allowing them to detect aircraft more accurately and at longer range.

@@Engines I
Tremendous advances were made in aircraft engines during the Second World War as superior powerplants were required to power ever-heavier fighter and bomber aircraft.

@@NOT USED (Democracy)

@@Engines II
Tremendous advances were made in aircraft engines during the Second World War as superior powerplants were required to power ever-heavier fighter and bomber aircraft.

@@Engines III
Tremendous advances were made in aircraft engines during the Second World War as superior powerplants were required to power ever-heavier fighter and bomber aircraft.

@@NOT USED (Electronics)

@@Jabo I
Jabo aircraft are ideally suited for attacking ground forces and freight trains.  Developing better jabo aircraft will increase their speed and range, allowing them to operate further behind enemy lines.

@@Jabo II
Jabo aircraft are ideally suited for attacking ground forces and freight trains.  Developing better jabo aircraft will increase their speed and range, allowing them to operate further behind enemy lines.

@@Jabo III
Jabo aircraft are ideally suited for attacking ground forces and freight trains.  Developing better jabo aircraft will increase their speed and range, allowing them to operate further behind enemy lines.

@@Engines IV
Tremendous advances were made in aircraft engines during the Second World War as superior powerplants were required to power ever-heavier fighter and bomber aircraft.

@@Experimental Design
The United States, the British Empire, and especially the German Reich all undertook experimental projects to develop new "wonder weapons" that could win the war.  Among them, the Me262, Meteor, and Atomic Bomb.  The first two can be built in this scenario.

@@Volksjäger
Late in the war, an effort was made to develop a "People's Fighter" - a jet aircraft capable of being mass-produced and flown by less experienced pilots.  The He162 is less costly to build than the Me262, but also less capable.

@@NOT USED (Fundamentalism)

@@Centrifugal-Flow Engine
Centrifugal compressors, sometimes called radial compressors, are a sub-class of dynamic axisymmetric work-absorbing turbomachinery.  They achieve a pressure rise by adding kinetic energy/velocity to a continuous flow of fluid through the rotor or impeller. This kinetic energy is then converted to an increase in potential energy/static pressure by slowing the flow through a diffuser. The pressure rise in the impeller is in most cases almost equal to the rise in the diffuser.

@@Axial-Flow Compressor
An axial compressor is a compressor that can continuously pressurize gases. It is a rotating, airfoil-based compressor in which the gas or working fluid principally flows parallel to the axis of rotation, or axially. This differs from other rotating compressors such as centrifugal compressors, axi-centrifugal compressors and mixed-flow compressors where the fluid flow will include a "radial component" through the compressor. The energy level of the fluid increases as it flows through the compressor due to the action of the rotor blades which exert a torque on the fluid. The stationary blades slow the fluid, converting the circumferential component of flow into pressure. Compressors are typically driven by an electric motor or a steam or a gas turbine.

Axial flow compressors produce a continuous flow of compressed gas, and have the benefits of high efficiency and large mass flow rate, particularly in relation to their size and cross-section. They do, however, require several rows of airfoils to achieve a large pressure rise, making them complex and expensive relative to other designs (e.g. centrifugal compressors).

Axial compressors are integral to the design of large gas turbines such as jet engines, high speed ship engines, and small scale power stations. They are also used in industrial applications such as large volume air separation plants, blast furnace air, fluid catalytic cracking air, and propane dehydrogenation. Due to high performance, high reliability and flexible operation during the flight envelope, they are also used in aerospace engines.

@@NOT USED (Guerrilla Warfare)

@@NOT USED (Gunpowder)

@@Jet Fighters
The plans for the first operational jet fighter, the Messerschmitt Me 262 Schwalbe were drawn up in 1939, and the airplane first flew under jet power in 1942. The Me 262 was not operational until 1944, and its effectiveness was crippled by the deteriorating infrastructure of Nazi Germany; the advanced materials needed for its engines were in short supply. Although the Me 262 is often classified as an early straight-wing design, it actually incorporates some features of a slightly "swept wing" design, as it had a leading edge sweep of only 18.5°, too slight to achieve any significant advantage in increasing the critical Mach number, the speed at which it can fly without encountering control problems due to compressibility. Sweep was added after the initial design of the aircraft for balance reasons, when the engines proved heavier than originally expected, primarily to position the center of lift properly relative to the center of mass. There was originally a 35° sweep, proposed by Adolph Busemann, which was not adopted. Despite its late-war debut into production, the winner of Nazi Germany's Volksjäger light fighter competition, the Heinkel He 162A Spatz. was just about to enter service with the Luftwaffe's JG 1 and even the specialist unit JV 44 at the war's end, but only very isolated engagements with Allied combat aircraft — with JG 1 losing 13 He 162As during April 1945, ten to operational losses not involving combat (the design was still going through its evaluation period) and only a pair of actual losses of He 162As from aerial combat. 320 examples of the He 162A were completed by the war's end, with hundreds more incomplete He 162A airframes in the process of manufacture.

World War II ended before jet fighters were common. The United States and the United Kingdom also had jet fighters operational before the end of the war. The British Gloster Meteor twin-engined high speed fighter was used to intercept Germany's V-1 flying bombs missiles over the British Isles and not deployed for combat over Europe until 1945 but still kept away from occupied territory to prevent the technology being picked up by the Germans or Soviets. By 1946 16 RAF squadrons were equipped with Meteors. The American Lockheed P-80 entered service in the closing phases of the war and was deployed to Europe but arrived too late to see any combat.

The earliest jet fighters usually did not carry radar — except for the handful of Me 262B-1a/U1 jet night fighters built and deployed in 1944-45 — or other sophisticated avionics and had similar equipment to the piston-engined counterparts used during the war. Machine guns and cannon were the primary armament, though the Me 262 also used air-to-air unguided rockets against Allied bomber formations and could carry unguided bombs, with many follow-on designs in development on paper or in wind tunnels as the war ended (especially in Germany), like the Focke-Wulf Ta 183.

@@The Third Reich
Nazi Germany is the common English name for Germany between 1933 and 1945, when Adolf Hitler and his Nazi Party (NSDAP) controlled the country through a dictatorship. Under Hitler's rule, Germany was transformed into a totalitarian state that controlled nearly all aspects of life via the Gleichschaltung legal process. The official name of the state was Deutsches Reich ("German Reich") until 1943 and Großdeutsches Reich ("Greater German Reich") from 1943 to 1945. Nazi Germany is also known as the Third Reich, from German Drittes Reich, meaning "Third Realm" or "Third Empire", the first two being the Holy Roman Empire and the German Empire. The Nazi regime ended after the Allies defeated Germany in May 1945, ending World War II in Europe.

@@Jet Fighter Design
The thought of jet fighters was one issue, designing a working model was another.  Many countries developed theoretical designs before the first fighters became operational.  This, and several other techs, represents the challenge of bringing these cutting-edge fighters into production.

@@Jet Bombers I
Allows the Arado Ar 234 Blitz, the world's first operational jet-powered bomber, built by the German Arado company in the closing stages of World War II.

Produced in very limited numbers, it was used almost entirely in the reconnaissance role, but in its few uses as a bomber it proved to be nearly impossible to intercept. It was the last Luftwaffe aircraft to fly over Britain during the war, in April 1945.

@@Jet Bombers II
Allows production of the Horten H.IX, RLM designation Ho 229 (or Gotha Go 229 for extensive re-design work done by Gotha to prepare the aircraft for mass production) was a German prototype fighter/bomber initially designed by Reimar and Walter Horten to be built by Gothaer Waggonfabrik late in World War II. It was the first flying wing to be powered by jet engines.

The design was a response to Hermann Göring's call for light bomber designs capable of meeting the "3×1000" requirement; namely to carry 1,000 kilograms (2,200 lb) of bombs a distance of 1,000 kilometres (620 mi) with a speed of 1,000 kilometres per hour (620 mph). Only jets could provide the speed, but these were extremely fuel-hungry, so considerable effort had to be made to meet the range requirement. Based on a flying wing, the Ho 229 lacked all extraneous control surfaces to lower drag. It was the only design to come even close to the 3×1000 requirements and received Göring's approval. Its ceiling was 15,000 metres (49,000 ft).

@@Wunderwaffe Program
Wunderwaffe is German for "Miracle Weapon" and was a term assigned during World War II by the Nazi Germany propaganda ministry to some revolutionary "superweapons". Most of these weapons however remained prototypes, which either never reached the combat theater, or if they did, were too late or in too insignificant numbers to have a military effect.

The V-weapons, which were developed earlier and saw considerable deployment, especially against London and Antwerp, trace back to the same pool of highly inventive armament concepts. Therefore, they are also included here.

As the war situation worsened for Germany from 1942, claims about the development of revolutionary new weapons which could turn the tide became an increasingly prominent part of the propaganda directed at Germans by their government. In reality, the advanced weapons under development generally required lengthy periods of design work and testing, and there was no realistic prospect of the German military being able to field them before the end of the war. When some advanced designs, such as the Panther tank and Type XXI submarine, were rushed into production their performance proved disappointing to the German military and leadership due to inadequate pre-production testing or poorly planned construction processes. However, a few of these weapons proved to be successful and have had a large influence in post war designs, such as the StG 44 assault rifle and the V-2 rocket.

In the German language the term Wunderwaffe generally refers to a universal solution which solves all problems related to a particular issue, mostly used ironically for its illusionary nature.

@@Pulse-Jet Engines
In 1934, Georg Madelung and Munich-based Paul Schmidt proposed to the German Air Ministry a "flying bomb" powered by Schmidt's pulsejet. Madelung co-invented the ribbon parachute, a device used to stabilise the V-1 in its terminal dive. Schmidt's prototype bomb failed to meet German Air Ministry specifications, especially owing to poor accuracy, range and high cost. The original Schmidt design had the pulsejet placed in a fuselage like a modern jet fighter, unlike the eventual V-1 which had the engine placed above the warhead and fuselage.

The Argus Company began work based on Schmidt's work. Other German manufacturers working on similar pulsejets and flying bombs were The Askania Company, Robert Lusser of Fieseler, Dr. Fritz Gosslau of Argus and the Siemens company, which were all combined to work on the V-1.

With Schmidt now working for Argus, the pulsejet was perfected and was officially known by its RLM designation as the Argus As 109-014. The first unpowered drop occurred at Peenemünde on 28 October 1942 and the first powered flight on 10 December 1942.

The pulsejet was evaluated to be an excellent balance of cost and function: a simple design that performed well for minimal cost. It would run on any grade of petroleum and the ignition shutter system was not intended to last beyond the V-1's normal operational flight life of one hour. Although it generated insufficient thrust for takeoff, the V-1's resonant jet could operate while stationary on the launch ramp. The simple resonant design based on the ratio (8.7:1) of the diameter to the length of the exhaust pipe functioned to perpetuate the combustion cycle, and attained stable resonance frequency at 43 cycles per second. The engine produced 2,200 N (490 lbf) of static thrust and approximately 3,300 N (740 lbf) in flight.

Ignition in the As 014 was provided by a single automotive spark plug, mounted approximately 75 cm (30 in) behind the front-mounted valve array. The spark only operated for the start sequence for the engine; the Argus As 014, like all pulsejets, did not require ignition coils or magnetos for ignition — the ignition source being the tail of the preceding fireball during the run. The engine casing did not provide sufficient heat to cause diesel-type ignition of the fuel, as there is insignificant compression within a pulsejet engine.

The Argus As 014 valve array was based on a shutter system that operated at the 43 to 45 cycles-per-second frequency of the engine.

Three air nozzles in the front of the Argus As 014 were connected to an external high pressure source to start the engine. The fuel used for ignition was acetylene, with the technicians having to place a baffle of wood or cardboard in the exhaust pipe to stop the acetylene diffusing before complete ignition. Once the engine ignited and minimum operating temperature was attained, external hoses and connectors were removed.

The V-1, being a cruise missile, lacked landing gear, instead the Argus As 014 was launched on an inclined ramp powered by a piston-driven steam catapult. Steam power to fire the piston was generated by the violent exothermic chemical reaction created when hydrogen peroxide and potassium permanganate (termed T-Stoff and Z-Stoff) are combined.

The principal military use of the pulsejet engine, with the volume production of the Argus As 014 unit (the first pulsejet engine ever in volume production), was for use with the V-1 flying bomb. The engine's characteristic droning noise earned it the nicknames "buzz bomb" or "doodlebug". The V-1 was a German cruise missile used in World War II, most famously in the bombing of London in 1944. Pulsejet engines, being cheap and easy to construct, were the obvious choice for the V-1's designers, given the Germans' materials shortages and overstretched industry at that stage of the war. Designers of modern cruise missiles do not choose pulsejet engines for propulsion, preferring turbojets or rocket engines. The only other use of the Pulsejet was for an experimental Einpersonnenfluggerät project for the German Heer.

Wright Field technical personnel reverse-engineered the V-1 from the remains of one that had failed to detonate in Britain. The result was the creation of the JB-2 Loon, with the airframe built by Republic Aviation, and the Argus As 014 reproduction pulsejet powerplant, known by its PJ31 American designation, being made by the Ford Motor Company. General Hap Arnold of the United States Army Air Forces was concerned that this weapon could be built of steel and wood, in 2000 man hours and approximate cost of US$600 (in 1943).

@@Vergeltungswaffen 1
Allows for production of V-Weapons, which can be used to strike against Urban targets in Britain.  Successfully destroying an urban target will yield 15 points for Germany.

@@Rocketry
The Germans made significant advances in rocketry througout the war, culminating in their vaunted (but wasteful) V-2 models.

@@Vergeltungswaffen 2
Allows for production of V-Weapons, which can be used to strike against Urban targets in Britain.  Successfully destroying an urban target will yield 15 points for Germany.

@@Strategic Bombers I
Strategic bombers are used to attack high-level targets deep in enemy territory.  More advanced strategic bombers have increased speed, range, defensive fire, and (in the case of RAF bombers) radar-evasiveness.

@@Strategic Bombers II
Strategic bombers are used to attack high-level targets deep in enemy territory.  More advanced strategic bombers have increased speed, range, defensive fire, and (in the case of RAF bombers) radar-evasiveness.

@@Strategic Bombers III
Strategic bombers are used to attack high-level targets deep in enemy territory.  More advanced strategic bombers have increased speed, range, defensive fire, and (in the case of RAF bombers) radar-evasiveness.

@@Window
Allows "pathfinder" units that carry window, a radar countermeasure useful for confusing and overwhelming German early-warning systems.

@@Tactical Bombers I
Tactical bombers are very useful for striking low-level targets such as radar sets, fortifications, and enemy troop concentrations.  More advanced tactical bombers will have increased speed and range, allowing them to operate further and further behind enemy lines.

@@Tactical Bombers II
Tactical bombers are very useful for striking low-level targets such as radar sets, fortifications, and enemy troop concentrations.  More advanced tactical bombers will have increased speed and range, allowing them to operate further and further behind enemy lines.

@@Tactical Bombers III
Tactical bombers are very useful for striking low-level targets such as radar sets, fortifications, and enemy troop concentrations.  More advanced tactical bombers will have increased speed and range, allowing them to operate further and further behind enemy lines.

@@Rocket Fighters
Allows for the Me-163, a curious aircraft that has a one-turn range but tremendous striking power.  It could be useful for defending concentrated industry, though its limited range will limit its use.

@@NOT USED (Monarchy)

@@1940s Tech II
Required to make the happiness improvements work correctly.

@@1940s Tech III
Required to make the happiness improvements work correctly.

@@Jet Fighter Focus
There was some initial discussion, especially in the German high command, of employing the new jet fighters in a jabo role.  This was, of course, a waste of resources.  Eventually the decision was made to use these aircraft in the traditional fighter role instead, where they were much more effective.

@@Jägernotprogramm
In the Emergency Fighter Program emphasis was laid in shifting production to defensive interceptor/fighters. A number of new aircraft design competition programmes were launched to provide new jet fighters. Production of the Messerschmitt Me 262A fighter versions continued, as well as the development of advanced piston-engined fighters such as the Dornier Do 335 as per Hitler's personal request on May 23, 1944, before the July 3 announcement of the program. Bomber designs powered by piston engines were severely curtailed or outright cancelled, with only jet bombers allowed to continue in production, such as the Arado Ar 234. New jet bombers such as the Junkers Ju 287 and Heinkel He 343 were worked on fitfully as low priority projects in the last months of the war.

Towards the end of the war in the design of the planes little thought was given to the safety or comfort of the pilots who were mostly Hitler Youth motivated by fanaticism. Some of the fighters, such as the Heinkel P.1077 Julia, the Blohm & Voss BV 40 and the Arado E.381 Kleinstjäger – "smallest fighter" were designed with the pilot flying the aircraft in a prone position. Powered by rockets, certain designs were a blend of "aircraft and projectile" in the words of Nazi propaganda, with a vertical takeoff like a missile launch system attempted for the first time in a manned aircraft, such as the Bachem Ba 349 Natter —in which the test-pilot died in the first flight. The Natter and Julia designs were expected to climb to their ceiling at vertical or near vertical angles, while the Arado design was a parasite aircraft that needed to be carried by a "mother" plane, with the unpowered BV 40 needing an aerotow into action.

These small interceptors had fuel for only a few minutes for combat action and landing was fraught with hazards, for after spending the rocket fuel the center of gravity would shift substantially making the aircraft difficult to handle at best and uncontrollable at worst. In the Natter or in the Fliegende Panzerfaust the pilot had to bail out at the end of a mission while the rear fuselage containing the rocket motor descended under its own parachute. Other designs, such as the Focke-Wulf Volksjäger 2, sought to overcome this problem by means of a very short fuselage design. Instead of having a wheeled undercarriage most rocket-powered planes that were able to land had only a fixed skid.

Such simplified and dangerous planes were the products of the last phase of the Third Reich, when the lack of materials and the dire need for a strong defense against the Allied bombing raids required such craft to be built quickly in underground factories. During this period the Nazi authorities also considered the use of selbstopfer (suicide) planes such as the Reichenberg (a manned version of the V-1 flying bomb), and in one case of actual use, a "special detachment" unit dedicated to desperate aerial ramming tactics, known as Sonderkommando Elbe.

@@Wilde Sau
Allows the Germans to transfer aircraft from day to night operations and vice versa by pressing "u."  You are free to transfer as many aircraft as you like, but doing so ends their turn.  While you can move night fighters to the day map, they will only be able to fly at low altitude (this is because to native transport in the base game, a unit must be allowed on both maps.  Allowing night fighters on the low alt map would mean they can be built there, which is undesirable).

Wilde Sau (German for wild boar) was the term given by the Luftwaffe to the tactic used from 1943 to 1944 during World War II by which British night bombers were engaged by single-seat day-fighter aircraft flying in the Defence of the Reich.

It was adopted when the Allies had the advantage over German radar controlled interception. The fighters had to engage the British bombers freely as they were illuminated by searchlight batteries, while avoiding their own anti-aircraft fire. After some initial successes, rising losses and deteriorating weather conditions led to the abandonment of the tactic.

@@SAVE FOR LATER USE (Philosophy)

@@Industry I
Industrial techs enable the expansion of industrial capacity.  Whenever an industrial improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it more productive. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building an industrial zone instantly increases base production by at least 20!

@@Industry II
Industrial techs enable the expansion of industrial capacity.  Whenever an industrial improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it more productive. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building an industrial zone instantly increases base production by at least 20!

@@Industry III
Industrial techs enable the expansion of industrial capacity.  Whenever an industrial improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it more productive. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building an industrial zone instantly increases base production by at least 20!

@@Fuel Production I
Fuel production techs enable the expansion of fuel refineries.  Whenever a fuel refinery improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it grant more fuel. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building a fuel refinery instantly increases base fuel production by at least 20!

@@Fuel Production II
Fuel production techs enable the expansion of fuel refineries.  Whenever a fuel refinery improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it grant more fuel. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building a fuel refinery instantly increases base fuel production by at least 20!

@@NOT USED (Radio)

@@NOT USED (Railroad)

@@Fuel Production III
Fuel production techs enable the expansion of fuel refineries.  Whenever a fuel refinery improvement is built, terrain changes near a city to make it grant more fuel. Remember not to judge a book by its cover in this scenario as very few cities will naturally have access to resources, but building a fuel refinery instantly increases base fuel production by at least 20!

@@War Economy
A war economy is the set of contingencies undertaken by a modern state to mobilize its economy for war production. Philippe Le Billon describes a war economy as a "system of producing, mobilizing and allocating resources to sustain the violence." Some measures taken include the increasing of Taylor rates as well as the introduction of resource allocation programs. Needless to say, every country approaches the reconfiguration of its economy in a different way.

Many states increase the degree of planning in their economies during wars; in many cases this extends to rationing, and in some cases to conscription for civil defenses, such as the Women's Land Army and Bevin Boys in the United Kingdom during World War II.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt stated if the Axis powers won, then "we would have to convert ourselves permanently into a militaristic power on the basis of war economy."

During total war situations, certain buildings and positions are often seen as important targets by combatants. The Union blockade, Union General William Tecumseh Sherman's March to the Sea during the American Civil War, and the strategic bombing of enemy cities and factories during World War II are all examples of total war.

Concerning the side of aggregate demand, this concept has been linked to the concept of "military Keynesianism", in which the government's military budget stabilizes business cycles and fluctuations and/or is used to fight recessions.

On the supply side, it has been observed that wars sometimes have the effect of accelerating progress of technology to such an extent that an economy is greatly strengthened after the war, especially if it has avoided the war-related destruction. This was the case, for example, with the United States in World War I and World War II. Some economists (such as Seymour Melman) argue, however, that the wasteful nature of much of military spending eventually can hurt technological progress.

@@Rationing
Rationing became common during the Second World War. Ration stamps were often used. These were redeemable stamps or coupons, and every family was issued a set number of each kind of stamp based on the size of the family, ages of children and income. The British Ministry of Food refined the rationing process in the early 1940s to ensure the population did not starve when food imports were severely restricted and local production limited due to the large number of men fighting the war.

Rationing on a scientific basis was pioneered by Elsie Widdowson and Robert McCance at the Department of Experimental Medicine, University of Cambridge. They worked on the chemical composition of the human body, and on the nutritional value of different flours used to make bread. Widdowson also studied the impact of infant diet on human growth. They studied the differing effects from deficiencies of salt and of water and produced the first tables to compare the different nutritional content of foods before and after cooking. They co-authored The Chemical Composition of Foods, first published in 1940 by the Medical Research Council. Their book "McCance and Widdowson" became known as the dietician's bible and formed the basis for modern nutritional thinking.

In 1939, they tested whether the United Kingdom could survive with only domestic food production if U-boats ended all imports. Using 1938 food-production data, they fed themselves and other volunteers a limited diet, while simulating the strenuous wartime physical work Britons would likely have to perform. The scientists found that the subjects' health and performance remained very good after three months. They also headed the first ever mandated addition of vitamins and mineral to food, beginning with adding calcium to bread. Their work became the basis of the wartime austerity diet promoted by the Minister of Food Lord Woolton.

Britons' actual wartime diet was never as severe as in the Cambridge study because imports from America successfully avoided the U-boats, but rationing improved the health of British people; infant mortality declined and life expectancy rose, discounting deaths caused by hostilities. This was because it ensured that everyone had access to a varied diet with enough vitamins.

The first commodity to be controlled was gasoline. On 8 January 1940, bacon, butter and sugar were rationed. This was followed by successive ration schemes for meat, tea, jam, biscuits, breakfast cereals, cheese, eggs, lard, milk and canned and dried fruit. Fresh vegetables and fruit were not rationed but supplies were limited. Many people grew their own vegetables, greatly encouraged by the highly successful 'digging for victory' motivational campaign.[14] Most controversial was bread; it was not rationed until after the war ended, but the "national loaf" of wholemeal bread replaced the ordinary white variety, to the distaste of most housewives who found it mushy, grey and easy to blame for digestion problems. Fish was not rationed but price increased considerably as the war progressed.

In summer 1941 the British appealed to Americans to conserve food to provide more to go to Britons fighting in the Second World War. The Office of Price Administration warned Americans of potential gasoline, steel, aluminum and electricity shortages. It believed that with factories converting to military production and consuming many critical supplies, rationing would become necessary if the country entered the war. It established a rationing system after the attack on Pearl Harbor. In June 1942 the Combined Food Board was set up to coordinate the worldwide supply of food to the Allies, with special attention to flows from the U.S. and Canada to Britain.

American civilians first received ration books—War Ration Book Number One, or the "Sugar Book"—on 4 May 1942, through more than 100,000 school teachers, PTA groups and other volunteers. Sugar was the first consumer commodity rationed. Bakeries, ice cream makers and other commercial users received rations of about 70% of normal usage. Coffee was rationed nationally on 27 November 1942 to 1 pound (0.45 kg) every five weeks. By the end of 1942, ration coupons were used for nine other items.  Typewriters, gasoline, bicycles, footwear, silk, nylon, fuel oil, stoves, meat, lard, shortening and oils, cheese, butter, margarine, processed foods (canned, bottled, and frozen), dried fruits, canned milk, firewood and coal, jams, jellies and fruit butter were rationed by November 1943.

The work of issuing ration books and exchanging used stamps for certificates was handled by some 5,500 local ration boards of mostly volunteer workers selected by local officials. As a result of the gasoline rationing, all forms of automobile racing, including the Indianapolis 500, were banned. All rationing in the United States ended in 1946.

In the Soviet Union food was rationed from 1941 to 1947. In particular, daily bread rations in sieged Leningrad were initially set at 800 grams. By the end of 1941 the bread rations were reduced to 250 grams for workers and 125 for everyone else, which resulted in surge of deaths caused by starvation. Starting from 1942 daily bread rations were increased to 350 grams for workers and 200 grams for everyone else. One of the documents of the period is the diary of Tanya Savicheva, who recorded the deaths of each member of her family during the siege.

Rationing was also introduced to a number of British dominions, and colonies, with rationing of clothing imposed in Australia, from 12th June 1942, and certain foodstuffs from 1943. Canada rationed tea, coffee, sugar, butter and mechanical spares, between 1942 and 1947. Cochin, Travancore and Madras states, of British India, elected to ration grain between the fall of 1943, and Spring 1944. While Egypt introduced a ration card based subsidy, of essential foodstuffs, in 1945, that's persisted into the 21st century.

@@The Axis Powers
The Axis powers, also known as the Rome–Berlin–Tokyo Axis, were the nations that fought in World War II against the Allies. The Axis powers agreed on their opposition to the Allies, but did not completely coordinate their activity.

The Axis grew out of the diplomatic efforts of Germany, Italy, and Japan to secure their own specific expansionist interests in the mid-1930s. The first step was the treaty signed by Germany and Italy in October 1936. Benito Mussolini declared on 1 November that all other European countries would from then on rotate on the Rome–Berlin axis, thus creating the term "Axis". The almost simultaneous second step was the signing in November 1936 of the Anti-Comintern Pact, an anti-communist treaty between Germany and Japan. Italy joined the Pact in 1937. The "Rome–Berlin Axis" became a military alliance in 1939 under the so-called "Pact of Steel", with the Tripartite Pact of 1940 leading to the integration of the military aims of Germany, Italy and Japan.

At its zenith during World War II, the Axis presided over territories that occupied large parts of Europe, North Africa, and East Asia. There were no three-way summit meetings and cooperation and coordination was minimal, with slightly more between Germany and Italy. The war ended in 1945 with the defeat of the Axis powers and the dissolution of their alliance. As in the case of the Allies, membership of the Axis was fluid, with some nations switching sides or changing their degree of military involvement over the course of the war.

@@Jägerstab
The Jägerstab (Fighter Staff) was a Nazi German governmental task force whose aim was to increase production of fighter aircraft during World War II. Established in March 1944, it was composed of government and SS personnel, as well as representatives of the aircraft manufacturers. The task force played a key role in the Emergency Fighter Program, including the "people's fighter" Heinkel He 162.

The Jägerstab increased the exploitation of slave labour for the benefit of Germany's industry and its air force, the Luftwaffe. It was one of the impetuses for the deportation of Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz, so that the able-bodied Jews could be used for aircraft production.

The progress achieved by the Jägerstab was seen as a success by the German authorities. From February–July 1944, the production of the Fw 190 and Me 109 fighters increased 150 percent.

The cooperation between the Reich Ministry of Aviation, the Ministry of Armaments and the SS proved especially productive. Although intended to function for only six months, Speer and Milch discussed with Goring in late May the possibility of centralising all of Germany's arms manufacturing under a similar task force. On 1 August 1944, Speer reorganised the task force into the Rüstungsstab (Armament Staff) to apply the same model of operation to all top-priority armament programs. The new task force assumed responsibilities for the Jägerstab's underground transfer projects.

@@Foggia Airfields
Granted by events after the Allies accumulate 250 points, this technology allows the 15th Air Force to enter the fray.

The Foggia Airfield Complex was a series of World War II military airfields located within a 40 km (25 mi) radius of Foggia, in the Province of Foggia, Italy. The airfields were used by the United States Army Air Force Fifteenth Air Force as part of the strategic bombardment campaign against Nazi Germany in 1944 and 1945, as well as by Twelfth Air Force and the Royal Air Force during the Italian Campaign (1943–1945).

@@Operation Overlord Prep.
NOTE: this tech is no longer used in this scenario.

Granted by events after the Allies accumulate 1,000 points, this technology allows the Allies to prepare to invade the continent by building landing craft.

"Overlord" was the name assigned to the establishment of a large-scale lodgement on the Continent. The first phase, the amphibious invasion and establishment of a secure foothold, was code-named Operation Neptune. To gain the required air superiority needed to ensure a successful invasion, the Allies launched a bombing campaign (codenamed Operation Pointblank) to target German aircraft-production, fuel supplies, and airfields. Under the Transport Plan, communications infrastructure and road and rail links were bombed to cut off the north of France and to make it more difficult to bring up reinforcements. These attacks were widespread so as to avoid revealing the exact location of the invasion. Elaborate deceptions were planned to prevent the Germans from determining the timing and location of the invasion.

The coastline of Normandy was divided into seventeen sectors, with codenames using a spelling alphabet—from Able, west of Omaha, to Roger on the east flank of Sword. Eight further sectors were added when the invasion was extended to include Utah on the Cotentin Peninsula. Sectors were further subdivided into beaches identified by the colours Green, Red, and White.

Allied planners envisaged preceding the sea-borne landings with airborne drops: near Caen on the eastern flank to secure the Orne River bridges, and north of Carentan on the western flank. The initial goal was to capture Carentan, Isigny, Bayeux, and Caen. The Americans, assigned to land at Utah and Omaha, were to cut off the Cotentin Peninsula and capture the port facilities at Cherbourg. The British at Sword and Gold, and the Canadians at Juno, were to capture Caen and form a front line from Caumont-l'Éventé to the south-east of Caen in order to protect the American flank, while establishing airfields near Caen. Possession of Caen and its surroundings would give the Anglo-Canadian forces a suitable staging area for a push south to capture the town of Falaise. A secure lodgement would be established and an attempt made to hold all territory captured north of the Avranches-Falaise line during the first three weeks. The Allied armies would then swing left to advance towards the River Seine.

The invasion fleet, led by Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay, was split into the Western Naval Task Force (under Admiral Alan G Kirk) supporting the American sectors and the Eastern Naval Task Force (under Admiral Sir Philip Vian) in the British and Canadian sectors. The American forces of the First Army, led by Lieutenant General Omar Bradley, comprised VII Corps (Utah) and V Corps (Omaha). On the British side, Lieutenant-General Miles Dempsey commanded the Second Army, under which XXX Corps was assigned to Gold and I Corps to Juno and Sword. Land forces were under the overall command of Montgomery, and air command was assigned to Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh-Mallory. The First Canadian Army included personnel and units from Poland, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Other Allied nations also participated.

@@Operation Neptune
The Normandy landings were the landing operations on Tuesday, 6 June 1944 of the Allied invasion of Normandy in Operation Overlord during World War II. Codenamed Operation Neptune and often referred to as D-Day, it was the largest seaborne invasion in history. The operation began the liberation of German-occupied France (and later Europe) from Nazi control, and laid the foundations of the Allied victory on the Western Front.

@@Vistula-Oder Offensive
Granted by events after the Allies have BOTH accumulated 1,250 points and landed in Europe.  Opens up the Russian Front so that the Red Army and Air Force can advance on to Eastern Germany.

The Vistula–Oder Offensive was a successful Red Army operation on the Eastern Front in the European Theatre of World War II in January 1945. It saw the fall of Krakow, Warsaw and Poznan.

The Red Army had built up their strength around a number of key bridgeheads, with two fronts commanded by Marshal Georgy Zhukov and Marshal Ivan Konev. Against them, the German Army Group A, led by Colonel-General Josef Harpe (soon replaced by Colonel-General Ferdinand Schorner), was outnumbered 5:1. Within days, German commandants evacuated the concentration camps, sending the prisoners on their death marches to the west, where ethnic Germans also started fleeing. In a little over two weeks, the Red Army had advanced 300 miles (483 km) from the Vistula to the Oder, only 43 miles (69 km) from Berlin, which was undefended. But Zhukov called a halt, owing to continued German resistance on his northern flank (Pomerania), and the advance on Berlin had to be delayed until April.

@@Tuskeegee Airmen
The Tuskegee Airmen is the popular name of a group of African-American military pilots (fighter and bomber) who fought in World War II. They formed the 332nd Fighter Group and the 477th Bombardment Group of the United States Army Air Forces. The name also applies to the navigators, bombardiers, mechanics, instructors, crew chiefs, nurses, cooks and other support personnel.

All black military pilots who trained in the United States trained at Moton Field, the Tuskegee Army Air Field, and were educated at Tuskegee University, located near Tuskegee, Alabama. The group included five Haitians from the Haitian Air Force, and one pilot from Trinidad. It also included a Hispanic or Latino airman born in the Dominican Republic.

Although the 477th Bombardment Group trained with North American B-25 Mitchell bombers, they never served in combat. The 99th Pursuit Squadron (later, 99th Fighter Squadron) was the first black flying squadron, and the first to deploy overseas (to North Africa in April 1943, and later to Sicily and Italy). The 332nd Fighter Group, which originally included the 100th, 301st, and 302nd Fighter Squadrons, was the first black flying group. It deployed to Italy in early 1944. In June 1944, the 332nd Fighter Group began flying heavy bomber escort missions, and in July 1944, with the addition of the 99th Fighter Squadron, it had four fighter squadrons.

The 99th Fighter Squadron was initially equipped with Curtiss P-40 Warhawk fighter-bomber aircraft. The 332nd Fighter Group and its 100th, 301st and 302nd Fighter Squadrons were equipped for initial combat missions with Bell P-39 Airacobras (March 1944), later with Republic P-47 Thunderbolts (June–July 1944), and finally with the aircraft with which they became most commonly associated, the North American P-51 Mustang (July 1944). When the pilots of the 332nd Fighter Group painted the tails of their P-47s red, the nickname "Red Tails" was coined. The red markings that distinguished the Tuskegee Airmen included red bands on the noses of P-51s as well as a red rudder; the P-51B and D Mustangs flew with similar color schemes, with red propeller spinners, yellow wing bands and all-red tail surfaces.

The Tuskegee Airmen were the first African-American military aviators in the United States Armed Forces. During World War II, black Americans in many U.S. states were still subject to the Jim Crow laws[N 1] and the American military was racially segregated, as was much of the federal government. The Tuskegee Airmen were subjected to discrimination, both within and outside the army.

@@Mass-Production Focus
This technology leads the country down the path of mass-producing inexpensive traditional fighters.

@@High-Technology Focus
This technology leads the country towards higher-tech aircraft such as jets, at the expense of traditional fighters that could be had less expensively.

@@Argument for Jet Jabo
Initial discussions surrounding the jet focused to an extent on their potential use as jabo or bomber aircraft.  This was a waste of resources, but significant discussion was needed to change course from this path in some countries.

@@Jet Fighters Prioritized
This represents the decision among high command to fully invest in jet fighters despite their high cost.

@@1940s Tech IV
Required to make the happiness improvements work correctly.

@@Proximity Fuses
Several nations developed proximity fuses in WW2 for their flak guns.  In this scenario, researching this technology will eliminate the 50% reduction in flak's reactive attack chances when the target aircraft is flying in cloud cover.

@@Aircraft Prototypes
Both sides made extensive gains in aircraft technology throughout the war.  This technology allows one to see which cities supply and demand which types of prototype (trade) units.

@@Search for Long-Range Fighter
The Allied High Command was not at all positive that long-range fighters were feasable, and indeed there was even a significant delay in appropriate drop tanks! The thought that the bomber could get through on its own permeated early Allied thought, leading to a delay in the development of escort aircraft.

@@The Allison-Powered Mustang
When the P-51A Mustang first came on line, experts noted that it was a tremendous aircraft at low altitudes, but very poor at higher altitude.  This was a major liability over the skies of NW Europe as most combat took place high above the optimal altitudes for the Mustang.

@@Rolls-Royce Merlin 61 Refit
British engineers found that by pairing a Rolls-Royce Merlin 61 to the P-51 airframe, earlier issues at high altitude were solved, with an increase of around 100mph at higher altitude thanks to the Merlin's two-stage supercharger.  An added plus was that the center of gravity of the aircraft was tilted forward, so to compensate, a very large gas tank was placed behind the pilot, significantly enhancing the Mustang's range.

@@Advanced Radar III
Increases likelihood of flak and 3rd generation night fighters of hitting units in and outside of clouds with reactive fire

@@Delays
Replaces future tech.  Should not normally be your main research goal.  On occasion, lua events may set your research goal to this if your opponent succeeds in a daring mission!

@@Tactics I
Increases attack strength of light, medium, and heavy guns (fighter aircraft munitions) by 1.  

@@Tactics II
Increases attack strength of light, medium, and heavy guns (fighter aircraft munitions) by 1.  Cumulative with tactics I.

@@Tactics III
Increases attack strength of light, medium, and heavy guns (fighter aircraft munitions) by 1.  Cumulative with tactics I and II.

@@Long-Range Escorts Needed
Granted after the Allies lose 60 bombers outside of escort range to direct attacks by enemy fighters.  Bombers lost to flak or reactive attacks will not count.  Enables research pathway to the P-51D Mustang.

@@Albert Speer's Death
Given by random chance if the Allies attack Berlin in a special mission.  The death of this important armaments minister would have significant impact on the German War economy.

@@Political Support I
Researching this grants 4,000 fuel points.

@@Political Support II
Researching this grants 4,000 fuel points.

@@Political Support III
Researching this grants 4,000 fuel points.

@@Political Support IV
Researching this grants 4,000 fuel points.


@IMPROVEMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the IMPROV.PDE text file in the original
;Civilopedia. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Palace will be the 16'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@IMPROVEMENT_INDEX
0,			; Nothing
1,			; Headquarters
-1,			; Barracks
3,			; Red Army
4,			; Civilian Population I
5,			; Fuel Refinery I
6,			; Aircraft Factory I
7,			; Quartermaster
8,			; City I
9,			; City II
10,			; Fuel Refinery II
11,			; Civilian Population II
12,			; Aircraft Factory II
-1,			; SAVE
14,			; Civilian Population III
15,			; Industry I
16,			; Industry II
17,			; Airbase
18,			; 15th Air Force
-1,			; NOT USED
-1,			; NOT USED
-1,			; NOT USED
22,			; Fuel Refinery III
-1,			; Sewer System
-1,			; Supermarket
25,			; Railyards
26,			; Aircraft Factory III
27,			; Flak Battery
28,			; Sabotage Port
29,			; Industry III
30,			; Docks
-1,			; Offshore Platform
32,			; Jagdfliegerschule
33,			; Wehrmacht
34,			; Military Port
-1,			; NOT USED
-1,			; SS Structural
-1,			; SS Component
-1,			; SS Module
-1,			; (Capitalization)
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@NOTHING


@@Headquarters
Moving the headquarters is a pointless exercise as the Allies as their sole focus is defeating Germany, though it might be an interesting choice as the Germans given that their supplies tend to be drawn away to other fronts (corruption renamed).

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@Red Army
Red Army units can only be built in a city that has this improvement, and this improvement cannot be built anywhere else besides 'The Russian Front' city on the far edge of the map.

@@Civilian Population I
Replaces temple.  This improvement is tied to an urban target unit on the night map.  Building this improvement creates urban terrain on the low-altitude map and an urban target unit on the night map. The destruction of that urban target unit removes this improvement and creates firestorm and rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, leading towards starvation and civil disorder.  The different "tiers" of civilian population correspond to the different tiers of fuel refineries, aircraft factories, and regular factories in that a city must have civilian population I to build industry I and so on.  Thus, a great tactic for the Allies is to make sure that their bombers strike the same cities in unison.  The USAAF can knock out the industries and by destroying the civilian population, the RAF can ensure the factories can't be rebuilt until such time that thee workers' homes are rebuilt.  Also, the higher the civilian population of a city, the more freighters that can unload there each turn.

@@Fuel Refinery I
Replaces marketplace.  This improvement is tied to a refinery target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates refinery terrain on the low-altitude map and a refinery unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade).  Allied attacks on German fuel industries will also reduce the German's fuel stockpiles.

@@Aircraft Factory I
Replaces library.  This improvement is tied to an aircraft factory target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map and an aircraft factory unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the factory on the low-altitude map.  Sometimes, this is near a city in question, but often it is off in the distance.  It wouldn't be a terrible idea to build airfields near these factories as that is one way to increase their production.  The downside is that they typically won't be connected to railtrack, so if the factory goes, it will be hard to keep the airfield in supply.

@@Quartermaster
Replaces courthouse.  The German player will want to consider building these in different cities to reduce the amount of fuel that is diverted to other fronts ('corruption' renamed).

@@City I
Replaces city walls.  Is a mechanism so that population center cities will look different than airfield cities.  This cannot be built, destroyed, or sold.

@@City II
Replaces aqueduct.  This cannot be built, destroyed, or sold.

@@Fuel Refinery II
Replaces bank.  This improvement is tied to a refinery target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates refinery terrain on the low-altitude map and a refinery unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade).  Allied attacks on German fuel industries will also reduce the German's fuel stockpiles.

@@Civilian Population II
Replaces cathedral.  This improvement is tied to an urban target unit on the night map.  Building this improvement creates urban terrain on the low-altitude map and an urban target unit on the night map. The destruction of that urban target unit removes this improvement and creates firestorm and rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, leading towards starvation and civil disorder.  The different "tiers" of civilian population correspond to the different tiers of fuel refineries, aircraft factories, and regular factories in that a city must have civilian population I to build industry I and so on.  Thus, a great tactic for the Allies is to make sure that their bombers strike the same cities in unison.  The USAAF can knock out the industries and by destroying the civilian population, the RAF can ensure the factories can't be rebuilt until such time that thee workers' homes are rebuilt.  Also, the higher the civilian population of a city, the more freighters that can unload there each turn.

@@Aircraft Factory II
Replaces university.  This improvement is tied to an aircraft factory target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map and an aircraft factory unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the factory on the low-altitude map.  Sometimes, this is near a city in question, but often it is off in the distance.  It wouldn't be a terrible idea to build airfields near these factories as that is one way to increase their production.  The downside is that they typically won't be connected to railtrack, so if the factory goes, it will be hard to keep the airfield in supply.

@@Shipping Losses
This is given to the Allies after they sustain significant shipping losses.  It has a high cost and cannot be sold.  They receive one of these in a random city every 20th freighter sunk.

@@Civilian Population III
Replaces colosseum.  This improvement is tied to an urban target unit on the night map.  Building this improvement creates urban terrain on the low-altitude map and an urban target unit on the night map. The destruction of that urban target unit removes this improvement and creates firestorm and rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, leading towards starvation and civil disorder.  The different "tiers" of civilian population correspond to the different tiers of fuel refineries, aircraft factories, and regular factories in that a city must have civilian population I to build industry I and so on.  Thus, a great tactic for the Allies is to make sure that their bombers strike the same cities in unison.  The USAAF can knock out the industries and by destroying the civilian population, the RAF can ensure the factories can't be rebuilt until such time that thee workers' homes are rebuilt.  Also, the higher the civilian population of a city, the more freighters that can unload there each turn.
 
@@Industry I
Replaces factory.  This improvement is tied to an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map that is high in production shields and an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields). 

@@Industry II
Replaces manufacturing plant.  This improvement is tied to an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map that is high in production shields and an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields). 

@@Airbase
This improvement must be in a city to create air units.  It cannot be built in population centers and is automatically built via events when each new airbase is founded.

@@15th Air Force
This improvement is required to build 15th Air Force bombers and the 332nd Fighter Group.  This improvement cannot be built and is already in place in the Italian Theatre city on the southern edge of the map.  No other air units besides the above-mentioned ones can be built in a city that has this improvement.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario. 

@@Fuel Refinery III
Replaces stock exchange.  This improvement is tied to a refinery target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates refinery terrain on the low-altitude map and a refinery unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade). Allied attacks on German fuel industries will also reduce the German's fuel stockpiles.

@@City III
Replaces sewer system.  This cannot be built, destroyed, or sold.

@@Rationing
This improvement is not used in this scenario.  It might eventually be used for balancing.

@@Railyards
Replaces superhighways.  This improvement is tied to a rail depot target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates this unit and also changes terrain on the low-altitude day and night map to railtrack, which trains can utilize.  When this unit is destroyed, this improvement is removed from the city and the railtrack square is removed, blocking the train's path until the improvement is rebuilt and the railtrack restored.  Note that units can strategically redeploy along the rail system between two cities that have this improvement, but only if there is a clear path between them (i.e., the railtrack is not severed).

@@Aircraft Factory III
Replaces research lab.  Only cities possessing this improvement may build "Prototypes II" units, which are a better trade unit and bring in more science beakers. This improvement is tied to an aircraft factory target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map and an aircraft factory unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the factory on the low-altitude map.  Sometimes, this is near a city in question, but often it is off in the distance.  It wouldn't be a terrible idea to build airfields near these factories as that is one way to increase their production.  The downside is that they typically won't be connected to railtrack, so if the factory goes, it will be hard to keep it in supply.

@@Flak Battery
This is a very expensive unit that increases the city's resistance to aerial attack.

@@Sabotage Port
Note: This is not currently used in this scenario.

The Germans have the option to sabotage their own ports to prevent them from falling into enemy hands.  The reason they would want to do this is because if the Allies manage to capture a port intact, they will received a one time bonus of three Battle Groups in that city.  To discourage abuse by the German player, this improvement cannot be sold when built and costs 100 fuel per turn.  Thus, the German player will want to use it sparingly, and only in cities where an invasion seems imminent.  

@@Industry III
Replaces solar plant.  This improvement is tied to an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  Building this improvement creates industrial terrain on the low-altitude map that is high in production shields and an industrial target unit on the high-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of that unit removes this improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields). 

@@Docks
Replaces harbor.  Is a source of extra food for cities but no longer has any effect beyond that.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario. 

@@Jagdfliegerschule
The Germans have the option of building exceptionally expensive Jagdfliegerschulen.  These will allow them to provide a steady stream of trained pilots to the front, however it has a very high cost in fuel meaning that it is unlikely the Germans will be able to build many of these, and they may find maintaining even one cost-prohibitive.  Please note that if one is built on the daytime map, it will also be built on the night map, and vice versa.

@@Wehrmacht
This improvement represents the cost, in fuel, of all German military operations across the war.  The improvement cannot be sold, but will automatically be destroyed if the Allies capture a city.  If the Germans recapture that city, it will not be rebuilt as presumably they would also capture some Allied fuel stores.  This improvement replaces the police station, but its main purpose is to represent the considerable fuel costs necessary to conduct the war.

@@Military Port
Replaces port facility.  Only cities with this improvement can produce naval units.  This improvement represents all the military naval installations including sub pens in the world.  The improvement is tied to a military port unit on the high-altitude map.  Destroying that unit removes this improvement.  Rebuilding this improvement restores that unit.  At the start of each turn, the game checks to see how many of these units each side possesses.  The Allies will gain significantly more freighters in the Atlantic once most of the German military ports are destroyed.

@@Wilde Sau
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This improvement is not used in this scenario.

@WONDER_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the WONDER.PDE text file in the ;original Civilopedia. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry, but adjusted by NUM_IMPROVEMENTS.
; For example, Adam Smith's Trading Co. will be the 0'th (remember,
; the list is zero based)(INDEX - NUM_INPROVEMENTS) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@WONDER_INDEX
-1,			; Pyramids
-1,			; Hanging Gardens
2,			; I.G. Farben
-1,			; Lighthouse
-1,			; Great Library
-1,			; Oracle
-1,			; Great Wall
-1,			; Sun Tzu's War Academy
8,			; Krupp Works
-1,			; Marco Polo's Embassy
-1,			; Michelangelo's Chapel
-1,			; Copernicus' Observatory
-1,			; Magellan's Expedition
-1,			; Shakespeare's Theatre
-1,			; Leonardo's Workshop
-1,			; J. S. Bach's Cathedral
-1,			; Isaac Newton's College
-1,			; Adam Smith's Trading Co.
-1,			; Darwin's Voyage
-1,			; Statue of Liberty
-1,			; Eiffel Tower
-1,			; Women's Suffrage
-1,			; Hoover Dam
-1,			; Manhattan Project
-1,			; United Nations
-1,			; Apollo Program
-1,			; SETI Program
-1,			; Cure for Cancer
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@I.G. Farben
Replaces Colossus.  German chemical company responsible for much of Germany's synthetic fuel.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@Krupp Works
Replaces King Richard's Crusade.  A major German steel producer.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@Peenemünde
Replaces Copernicus' Observatory.  Peenemünde was a major research facility of the Germans on the Baltic coast.  Among other "wunderwaffen," the V-2 was in large part developed there.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@The Atlantic Wall
Replaces J.S. Bach's Cathedral.  The Germans are relatively secure behind their Atlantic Wall, but should this fall, resistance movements will only become all the more emboldened and it will be more difficult to keep the peace.

@@Jägernotprogramm
Replaces Isaac Newton's College.  The Jägernotprogramm or "Emergency Fighter Program" represented Germany's efforts to develop super aircraft capable of dealing with the hordes of Allied aircraft.

@@Albert Speer's Reforms
Replaces Adam Smith's Trading Company.  Albert Speer managed to increase German production throughout the war, despite the Allied bombing campaign.

@@56th Fighter Group.
A famous American fighter group equipped with the P-47 Thunderbolt during the war.  The Wonder is merely here for "flavor" and has no useful effect in the scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@JG2 'Richthofen'
A famous German fighter group during the war.  The Wonder is merely here for "flavor" and has no useful effect in the scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@Arsenal of Democracy
Replaces Hoover Dam.  Allows the Allies to focus pursuits on other items as they receive enhanced production for free.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@JG26 'Schlageter'
A famous German fighter group during the war.  The Wonder is merely here for "flavor" and has no useful effect in the scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@@NOT USED
This WoW is not in this scenario.

@UNIT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the UNITS.PDE and UNITS2.PDE text ;files in the original Civilopedia, strung together to make one contiguous section. (French and German ;versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Settlers will be the 50'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@UNIT_INDEX		
0,	;	Red Army
1,	;	Construction Team
2,	;	Bofors 40mm
3,	;	Early Radar
4,	;	Advanced Radar*
5,	;	Fw200
6,	;	Freight Train*
7,	;	Railyard
8,	;	Aerial Photos
9,	;	Sdkfz 7/2
10,	;	88mm Flak Battery
11,	;	Flak Train
12,	;	Me109G6
13,	;	Me109G14
14,	;	Me109K4
15,	;	Fw190A5
16,	;	Fw190A8
17,	;	Fw190D9
18,	;	Ta152
19,	;	Military Port
20,	;	Me110
21,	;	Me410
22,	;	Ju88C
23,	;	Ju88G
24,	;	He219
25,	;	He162
26,	;	Me163
27,	;	Me262
28,	;	Ju87G
29,	;	Fw190F8
30,	;	Do335
31,	;	Do217
32,	;	He277
33,	;	Arado234
34,	;	Go229
35,	;	Spitfire IX
36,	;	Spitfire XII
37,	;	Spitfire XIV
38,	;	Hurricane IV
39,	;	Typhoon
40,	;	Tempest
41,	;	Meteor
42,	;	Beaufighter
43,	;	Mosquito NF Mk II
44,	;	Mosquito NF Mk XIII
45,	;	Industry I
46,	;	Industry II
47,	;	Industry III
48,	;	Prototypes I
49,	;	Prototypes II
50,	;	P-47D11
51,	;	P-47D25
52,	;	P-47D40
-1,	;	SAVE
54,	;	P-38H
55,	;	P-38J
56,	;	P-51B
57,	;	P-51D
58,	;	P-80
59,	;	Stirling
60,	;	Halifax
61,	;	Lancaster
62,	;	Pathfinder
63,	;	A-20
64,	;	B-26
65,	;	A-26
66,	;	B-17F
67,	;	B-24J
68,	;	B-17G
69,	;	Schutzen
70,	;	Panzers
71,	;	Egon Mayer
72,	;	3.7-inch Flak
73,	;	He111
74,	;	Allied Infantry
75,	;	Allied Tanks
76,	;	Sunderland
77,	;	Hispanos
78,	;	Hermann Graf
79,	;	Josef Priller
80,	;	Adolf Galland
81,	;	Task Group
82,	;	Task Group
83,	;	332nd Fighter Group
84,	;	15th Air Force Bombers
85,	;	Aircraft Factory I
86,	;	Aircraft Factory II
87,	;	Aircraft Factory III
88,	;	Refinery I
89,	;	Refinery II
90,	;	Refinery III
91,	;	Urban Center I
92,	;	Urban Center II
93,	;	Urban Center III
94,	;	Gun Battery
95,	;	Light Guns
96,	;	Medium Guns
97,	;	Heavy Guns
98,	;	250lb Bomb
99,	;	500lb Bomb
100,	;	1000lb Bomb
101,	;	Window
102,	;	H.W. Schnaufer
103,	;	A2A Rockets
104,	;	Flak Burst
105,	;	Damaged B-17F
106,	;	Neutral Territory
107,	;	Damaged B-17G
108,	;	P-38L
109,	;	Historic Target
110,	;	Torpedo
111,	;	Aircraft Carrier
-1,	;	SAVE
-1,	;	SAVE
114,	;	Heavy Shells
115,	;	Freighter
116,	;	Light Flak
117,	;	Yak-3
118,	;	Il-2
119,	;	3.7cm Flak
120,	;	Ju-188 (PR)
121,	;	V1 Launch Site
122,	;	V2 Launch Site
123,	;	V1 Buzzbomb
124,	;	V2 Rocket
125,	;	Mosquito (PR)
126,    ;	U-Boat
-2,	; 	MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!


@@00 Red Army

After the Allies have accumulated a large number of points and have invaded northwest Europe, the Red Army will "break through" German defenses off map and Red Army Groups will begin to stream out of their base, towards Berlin.  This unit functions just like an Army Group in that it represents all the major ground forces available to you.  These are meant to take territory and are a significantly better option than aircraft for mopping up urban centers as they can swipe away flak batteries with ease.  The only unit that can effectively stop them are enemy army groups.  This unit is also able to call up an artillery barrage by pressing "k," though this comes at the cost of all movement points.  This unit can make amphibious assaults.  Because the Soviets shoot their own soldiers when they try to retreat, when destroyed, it will not create a battered army group.

@@01 Construction Team

Construction Teams are important units for both sides in this scenario.  Their main role is to establish new air bases (cities).  Every time that they establish a city on the low-altitude daylight map, a second city will automatically populate on the night map in the same location, and vice-versa.  Construction Teams can enter both maps by going to a switchyard (transporter) tile and pressing 'n.'  In addition to founding cities, Construction teams are also able to change grassland terrain on the low-alt map to 'installations,' on which heavy flak guns and gun batteries can be deployed.  Construction teams can also change grassland terrain on the night map to 'searchlights' which are low-defensive terrain - enemy aircraft flying through these will be very vulnerable to attack.  Finally, construction teams can deposit 'fuel dumps' (roads) to increase fueling capabilities.  

@@02 Bofors 40mm

This is light flak available to the Allies on the low-altitude day map and also the night map.  It fires more powerful ammunition than the heavy flak, but this ammunition cannot reach high-altitude targets.  Defensively, it can make 1 reactive attack per turn at a range of 2.  Flying at low altitude over enemy territory is a very dangerous mission! The intended purpose of this unit is to defend airfields.

@@03 Early Radar

This represents the earlier radar models available to Germany and Britain.  It utilizes radar by pressing 'k.'  Depending on several factors, aircraft may be detected and a marker may be placed on the map showing their approximate or exact location.  Researching Night Fighters I, II, and III as well as Advanced Radar I and II will increase its effectiveness.  Selecting one of these units and pressing 'backspace' will prompt you to decide if you would like to scan the skies with all radar sets at once or not.  Only select this option if you do not wish to move any radar sets this turn as it will expend the movement points of all sets.  

@@04 Advanced Radar

This represents the more advanced radar models available to Germany and Britain that came online as the war progressed.  It utilizes radar by pressing 'k.'  Depending on several factors, aircraft may be detected and a marker may be placed on the map showing their approximate or exact location.  Researching Night Fighters I, II, and III as well as Advanced Radar I and II will increase its effectiveness.  Selecting one of these units and pressing 'backspace' will prompt you to decide if you would like to scan the skies with all radar sets at once or not.  Only select this option if you do not wish to move any radar sets this turn as it will expend the movement points of all sets.  


@@05 Fw200 "Condor"

This long-range aircraft can only fly at low-altitude by day and is meant to locate Allied freighters to call in "wolf packs" of U-Boats towards the target.  It can also attack targets itself as it carries 1x 250lb bomb.  An attack run will reduce its movement points to 1, leaving it very vulnerable to nearby Allied fighters.  Attacks cost 20 fuel points.  

@@06 Freight Trains

This unit can only be built in major population centers that have the Industry I improvement.  The purpose of this unit is to be built in the population centers and then delivered via railtrack to nearby airfields.  Once there, it should be disbanded to help build new aircraft and other units.  It can be used to help rush-build improvements in a pinch as well.  Given that "gold" has been renamed as "fuel" in this scenario, and given that all aircraft require fuel to attack, there is a significant advantage to using this unit to rush-build items rather than purchasing them and potentially grounding your aircraft in the process.  Freight trains will spawn for the Allies when a Freighter ship reaches a city with a port and presses 'k.'  The freighter is deleted and a freight train takes its place.  Freight trains can also spawn for Germany in France assuming that they have sufficient ground forces in France to fight the French Resistance.

@@07 Railyard

These units are placed via events on the high-altitude daylight map whenever a city builds the "railyards" improvement.  Destroying this unit removes that improvment from the city and also changes some nearby "rail track" terrain to "bombed track" terrain, which is impassable to trains, thus inhibiting movement by freight trains from one place to the next.  As many ground units can strategically redeploy between cities with railyards, these are a useful target.  They also provide the Allies with 2.5 points when destroyed.

@@08 Aerial Photos

This unit has one spy function: investigate city.  Recon aircraft can take aerial photographs of enemy cities by pressing 'k' over land (it will not work over water because the spy unit must be a ground unit to work, and we cannot create ground units on water with lua...yet).  In this scenario, both sides start with moderately-developed cities, and a big part of the strategy is building them up further.  Thus, it is important to make recon flights over enemy territory to get a better grasp on what your opponent is doing.

@@09 Sdkfz 7/2

An anti-aircraft halftrack available to the Germans.  It carries light flak which it can fire from any terrain.  It is also good defensively against air attacks and can be used to defend airfields from strafing and bombing runs.  It is expensive to build because it is so versatile.  Defensively, it can make up to 2 reactive attacks per turn at a range of 2.  Its intended purpose is to rush to different locations to shoot down low-flying aircraft.

@@10 88mm Flak Battery

Heavy flak battery available to the Germans.  It will be fortified at the start of each turn unless it can attack an enemy aircraft within range, so remember to activate any units you had been moving from one base to another.  It can fire flak bursts towards the high-altitude daylight map and night maps with its primary and secondary attack keys, respectively.  It must be on "installation" terrain or within a city or strategic resource to fire ammo.  Please note that this ammo does not require any fuel to fire, thus it may be beneficial to stack these near likely targets to spare your fighters and fuel resources.  Defensively, it can make up to 4 reactive attacks per turn at a range of 2, and will do so against targets on any map, making this a formidable defensive weapon when concentrated.

NOTE: Reactive attacks against aircraft in cloud cover is halved until the development of "Proximity Fuses."

@@11 Flak Train

A mobile heavy flak battery available to the Germans.  It can fire flak bursts towards the high-altitude daylight map and night maps with its primary and secondary attack keys, respectively.  It can only travel on certain terrain - typically rail track, urban, or industries (via sidetracks, agreements of which would qualify as "insured contracts" under the CG 10 01 10 01).  It's main role is to patrol your railways and escort freight trains to their destination.  Defensively, it can make up to 2 reactive attacks per turn at a range of 2, and will do so against targets on any map.

NOTE: Reactive attacks against aircraft in cloud cover is halved until the development of "Proximity Fuses."

@@12 Me109G6

The Me109 series is Germany's main escort fighter.  It carries light guns and can fire them 2 times per turn.  It has a relatively short range though variants do increase this somewhat.  It is best used to guard interceptors from Allied attacks, though in a pinch, it can help bring down bombers.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Me109G6 can make up to 2 reactive attacks at a range of 1, and will have better success reacting against fighters than bombers.  The Me109 series are the only Luftwaffe fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@13 Me109G14

The Me109 series is Germany's main escort fighter.  It carries light guns and can fire them 2 times per turn.  It has a relatively short range though variants do increase this somewhat.  It is best used to guard interceptors from Allied attacks, though in a pinch, it can help bring down bombers.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Me109G14 can make up to 2 reactive attacks at a range of 2, and will have better success reacting against fighters than bombers.  The Me109 series are the only Luftwaffe fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@14 Me109K4

The Me109 series is Germany's main escort fighter.  It carries light guns and can fire them 2 times per turn.  It has a relatively short range though variants do increase this somewhat.  It is best used to guard interceptors from Allied attacks, though in a pinch, it can help bring down bombers.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Me109K4 can make up to 2 reactive attacks at a range of 3, and will have better success reacting against fighters than bombers.  The Me109 series are the only Luftwaffe fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@15 Fw190A5

The Fw190 is Germany's main daylight interceptor.  It carries medium guns and can fire them 3 times per turn.  This enables it to make fast "slashing attacks" where it strikes the enemy and then flies off out of range.  Later variants are faster and can move further way.  Alternately, it can press home the attack if it feels Allied fighters are out of range.  It is not as good defensively as the Me109 so it should use its speed to advantage or work in pairs with escorts.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Fw190A5 can make up to 1 reactive attack at a range of 2, and will have better success reacting against bombers than fighters.  It will also have better success reacting at low altitude than high altitude, as the type was a poor-performer at high altitudes historically.

@@16 Fw190A8

The Fw190 is Germany's main daylight interceptor, and the Fw190A8 expands on its arsenal.  It carries medium guns and can fire them 3 times per turn by pressing "k," or it can fire one set of air-to-air rockets per turn by pressing "backspace."  Unlike a bomber destroyer, bombers will still defend against rocket attacks  It is not as good defensively as the Me109 so it should use its speed to advantage or work in pairs with escorts.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Fw190A8 can make up to 2 reactive attacks at a range of 1, and will have better success reacting against bombers than fighters.  It will also have better success reacting at low altitude than high altitude, as the type was a poor-performer at high altitudes historically.

@@17 Fw190D9

The Fw190D9 corrects issues with the A-series and is a capable high-altitude performer.  It carries medium guns and can fire them 3 times per turn.  This enables it to make fast "slashing attacks" where it strikes the enemy and then flies off out of range.  Later variants are faster and can move further way.  Alternately, it can press home the attack if it feels Allied fighters are out of range.  It is not as good defensively as the Me109 so it should use its speed to advantage or work in pairs with escorts.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Fw190D9 can make up to 1 reactive attack at a range of 3, and will have better success reacting against bombers than fighters.  Owing to its better high-altitude performance, it is equally adept at interceptions at low or high altitude.

@@18 Ta152

The Ta152 is Germany's premier propellor-driven daylight interceptor.  It carries medium guns and can fire them 3 times per turn.  This enables it to make fast "slashing attacks" where it strikes the enemy and then flies off out of range.  It is very fast and can catch the P-51 Mustang.  It is not as good defensively as the Me109 so it should use its speed to advantage or work in pairs with escorts.  Attacks cost five fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Ta152 can make up to 2 reactive attacks at a range of 3, and is Germany's only propeller-driven aircraft that can intercept jets, though the chances of doing so aren't good.  The Ta152 is quite capable at high altitutde.

@@19 Military Port

This unit represents all the military naval installations including sub pens in the world.  The unit is tied to a military port improvement.  Destroying the unit removes the improvement.  Rebuilding the improvement restores the unit.  At the start of each turn, the game checks to see how many of these units each side possesses.  The Allies can only unload freighters in cities that have a military port, so these are valuable targets for the Luftwaffe.  The number of freighters that the Allies can accumulate each turn is affected by the number of military ports that Germany possesses.  

@@20 Me110
The Germans possess two bomber destroyers: The Me110 and Me410.  They are slow but can stay airborne for significant time.  They fire the air-to-air rocket, which is very powerful and can break up bomber formations.  They can only fire this once per turn, however, which means their movement is reduced to one, and they are therefore exceptionally vulnerable to counterattack.  Attacks cost ten fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  While bomber destroyers are very vulnerable to interception by enemy fighters, their rockets are meant to break up bomber formations and as such they will not draw defensive fire from bombers.  As they are so slow, bomber destroyers will not react defensively to nearby aircraft.  These make good night fighters because they are often capable of destroying an aircraft in one pass, before it can escape into the night.

@@21 Me410

The Germans possess two bomber destroyers: The Me110 and Me410.  They are slow but can stay airborne for significant time.  They fire the air-to-air rocket, which is very powerful and can break up bomber formations.  They can only fire this once per turn, however, which means their movement is reduced to one, and they are therefore exceptionally vulnerable to counterattack.  Attacks cost ten fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  While bomber destroyers are very vulnerable to interception by enemy fighters, their rockets are meant to break up bomber formations and as such they will not draw defensive fire from bombers.  As they are so slow, bomber destroyers will not react defensively to nearby aircraft.  These make good night fighters because they are often capable of destroying an aircraft in one pass, before it can escape into the night.

@@22 Ju88C

German nightfighter with good speed and considerable range allowing it to stay airborne and search for targets.  It carries medium guns and can fire them twice per turn.  Attacks cost ten fuel points each.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Ju88C can make 1 reactive attacks at a range of 1.  While it can be brought into daylight operations it can only be used at low altitude.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked. 

@@23 Ju88G

German nightfighter with good speed and considerable range allowing it to stay airborne and search for targets.  It carries medium guns and can fire them twice per turn.  Attacks cost ten fuel points each.  It also carries onboard radar that can be utilized via its secondary attack at no fuel cost, which is useful after an Allied bomber escapes an earlier attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Ju88G can make 2 reactive attacks at a range of 1. While it can be brought into daylight operations it can only be used at low altitude.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked. 

@@24 He219

Very dangerous German nightfighter with good speed and considerable range allowing it to stay airborne and search for targets.  It carries medium guns and can fire them twice per turn.  Attacks cost ten fuel points each.  It also carries onboard radar that can be utilized via its secondary attack at no fuel cost, , which is useful after an Allied bomber escapes an earlier attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields. Defensively, the He219 can make 2 reactive attacks at a range of 2. While it can be brought into daylight operations it can only be used at low altitude.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked. 

@@25 He162

German jet fighter that can attack up to 10 times per turn, though at a great cost (25 fuel per attack).  Attacking the full 10 times would also leave this fighter exceptionally vulnerable to enemy operations on the Allied turn.  A better strategy is likely to attack 4-5 times and then flee at high speed.  These units are very vulnerable to being shot while on airfields and care should be taken to station them only at well-defended fields.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the He162 can make 1 reactive attack at a range of 4, but this would require it to end its turn airborne, which would leave it considerably exposed to attack.  It can intercept jets.

@@26 Me163

German rocket fighter with extremely short range, though it can attack up to 10x before landing.  This is probably not the most practical unit though it could be effective at guarding very important targets if you purpose-built an airfield near them.  Each attack costs 40 fuel.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  As this aircraft must take off, attack, and land within a single turn, it cannot react defensively on the Allied turn.

@@27 Me262

German jet fighter that can attack up to 10 times per turn, though at a great cost (50 fuel per attack).  Attacking the full 10 times would also leave this fighter exceptionally vulnerable to enemy operations on the Allied turn.  A better strategy is likely to attack 4-5 times and then flee at high speed.  These units are very vulnerable to being shot while on airfields and care should be taken to station them only at well-defended fields.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Me262 can make 2 reactive attacks at a range of 5, but this would require it to end its turn airborne, which would leave it considerably exposed to attack.  It can intercept jets.

@@28 Ju87G

A very slow close air support unit that carries an exceptionally powerful 1000lb bomb.  This makes the unit very good for attacking Allied warships and other hard targets on the low-alt map.  Attacks cost 5 fuel points. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  It is the only Luftwaffe bomber that can land on aircraft carriers.  A Ju87 takes less damage from flak than most other aircraft and its 1,000lb bomb is best-used to destroy enemy flak installations.

@@29 Fw190F8

The Fw190F8 is an armored fighter-bomber that can be used to attack targets on the low-alt map.  Its primary attack is comprised of medium guns, which it can fire twice per turn at the cost of 5 fuel points.  It also carries a 1000lb bomb as a secondary attack, which also costs 5 fuel points. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  As this is a close support aircraft, it will not make any reactive attacks.  A Fw190F8 takes less damage from flak than most other aircraft and its 1,000lb bomb is best-used to destroy enemy flak installations.

@@30 Do335

A fast German fighter-bomber that can be used to attack targets on the low-alt map.  Though not as resilient as the 190F8, it makes up for that with speed.  Its primary attack is comprised of medium guns, which it can fire twice per turn at the cost of 5 fuel points.  It also carries two powerful 1000lb bombs as a secondary attack, which also costs 5 fuel points. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  As this is a close support aircraft, it will not make any reactive attacks.  A Do335 takes less damage from flak than most other aircraft and its 1,000lb bomb is best-used to destroy enemy flak installations.


@@31 Do217

A long-range strategic bomber available to the Germans should they choose to maintain the Blitz against England.  It carries 2x 250lb bombs when undamaged and each bombing runs cost 10 fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Will react with defensive fire 1 time at a range of 2 tiles if it or another aircraft near it is attacked.

@@32 He277

A long-range strategic bomber available to the Germans should they choose to maintain the Blitz against England.  It carries 3x 250lb bombs when undamaged and each bombing runs cost 20 fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Will react with defensive fire 2 times at a range of 2 tiles if it or another aircraft near it is attacked.

@@33 Arado234

German jet bomber.  Carries 3x500lb bombs at a cost of 50 fuel per attack.  It cannot go to high level, so should be used to attack Allied troops and warships.  It could also be useful for attacking Allied frieght trains or freighters.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  This unit will not react defensively and should instead rely on its speed to escape interception.

@@34 Go229

German strategic jet bomber.  Carries 3x1,000lb bombs and can attack 10 times at a cost of 50 fuel per attack.  It has a very long range however where it shines is mid- to short-range attacks where it can make several bombing runs before retiring well to the distance.  Long-range attacks limit its most important asset--speed--and can leave it susceptible to counter attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  This unit will not react defensively and should instead rely on its speed to escape interception.

@@35 Spitfire IX

The Spitfire is a good all-around aircraft for the Allies, though it has very short range.  Be careful as it can move over the course of three turns, which can leave it short of gas to return home. It has decent defense stats and can serve as an escort, but also is one of the few Allied aircraft to carry hispanos, making it better at attacking enemy aircraft than most American fighters.  It can work well as part of an escort but its short range will limit its usefulness before closer bases are established on the continent.  It can fire two times per turn at a cost of 5 fuel points per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it will reactively intercept enemies up to 2 times at a range of 1.  The Spitfire series are the only Allied fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@36 Spitfire XII

The Spitfire is a good all-around aircraft for the Allies, though it has short range.  Be careful as it can move over the course of three turns, which can leave it short of gas to return home. It has decent defense stats and can serve as an escort, but also is one of the few Allied aircraft to carry hispanos, making it better at attacking enemy aircraft than most American fighters.  It can work well as part of an escort but its short range will limit its usefulness before closer bases are established on the continent.  It can fire two times per turn at a cost of 5 fuel points per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it will reactively intercept enemies up to 2 times at a range of 2.  The Spitfire series are the only Allied fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@37 Spitfire XIV

The Spitfire is a good all-around aircraft for the Allies, though it has short range.  Be careful as it can move over the course of three turns, which can leave it short of gas to return home.  It has decent defense stats and can serve as an escort, but also is one of the few Allied aircraft to carry hispanos, making it better at attacking enemy aircraft than most American fighters.  It can work well as part of an escort but its short range will limit its usefulness before closer bases are established on the continent.  It can fire two times per turn at a cost of 5 fuel points per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it will reactively intercept enemies up to 2 times at a range of 3.  It is quite good at reactive attacks at high altitude.  The Spitfire series are the only Allied fighters that can land on aircraft carriers.

@@38 Hurricane IV

This Royal Airforce fighter-bomber is limited to low-altitude.  It's primary attack fires medium guns up to two times per turn, and its secondary attack releases a 500lb bomb once per sortie.  All attacks cost five fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can make a reactive attack 1 time at a range of 1.  The Hurricane IV is the only Allied fighter-bomber that can land on aircraft carriers.  Hurricanes take less damage from flak than most other aircraft.

@@39 Typhoon

This Royal Airforce fighter-bomber is limited to low-altitude.  It's primary attack fires medium guns up to two times per turn, and its secondary attack releases a 1000lb bomb once per sortie.  All attacks cost five fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can make a reactive attack 1 time at a range of 2.  Typhoons take less damage from flak than most other aircraft and their 1,000lb bomb is best-used to destroy enemy flak installations.

@@40 Tempest

This Royal Airforce fighter-bomber is limited to low-altitude.  It's primary attack fires medium guns up to two times per turn, and its secondary attack releases two 1000lb bombs once per sortie.  All attacks cost five fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can make a reactive attack 1 time at a range of 3.  Tempests take less damage from flak than most other aircraft and their 1,000lb bomb is best-used to destroy enemy flak installations.


@@41 Meteor

British jet fighter that can attack up to 10 times per turn, though at a great cost (50 fuel per attack).  Attacking the full 10 times would also leave this fighter exceptionally vulnerable to enemy operations.  A better strategy is likely to attack 4-5 times and then flee at high speed.  These units are very vulnerable to being shot while on airfields and care should be taken to station them only at well-defended fields.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the Meteor can make 2 reactive attacks at a range of 5, but this would require it to end its turn airborne, which would leave it considerably exposed to attack.  It can intercept jets.

@@42 Beaufighter

The Beaufighter is a British night fighter with limited range that can attack two times per turn with medium guns at a cost of 10 fuel points per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can make a reactive attack 1 time at a range of 1.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked.  

@@43 Mosquito NF Mk II

The Mosquito NF Mk II is a British night fighter that can attack two times per turn with medium guns at a cost of 10 fuel points per attack.  Its primary attack fires the munitions.  It also carries radar on board which can be utilized up to four times per turn by pressing "backspace" for no fuel cost.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can react 2 times at a range of 1.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked. 

@@44 Mosquito NF Mk XIII

The Mosquito NF Mk II is a British night fighter with limited range that can attack two times per turn with medium guns at a cost of 10 fuel points per attack.  Its primary attack fires the munitions.  It also carries radar on board as a secondary attack which can be utilized up to four times per turn for no fuel cost.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, it can react 2 times at a range of 2.  As a dedicated night fighter, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked. 

@@45 Industry I

This unit is tied to a factory (production) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@46 Industry II

This unit is tied to a factory (production) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@47 Industry III

This unit is tied to a factory (production) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's industrial production (shields) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@48 Prototypes I

NOTE: This unit currently isn't in this scenario.

Prototypes I take the place of Caravans in Over the Reich.  Though their fuel payout has been disabled, they do provide a healthy boost to research when delivered to other cities.  They can only be built in cities with basic Aircraft Factories.

@@49 Prototypes II

NOTE: This unit currently isn't in this scenario.

Prototypes II take the place of freight in Over the Reich.  Though their fuel payout has been disabled, they do provide a healthy boost to research when delivered to other cities.  Their payout tends to be higher than those of Prototypes I. They can only be built in cities with Aircraft Factories III.

@@50 P-47D11

The first American escort plane available and a decent all-around aircraft.  It has a high defense bonus but limited range.  Be careful as it can move over the course of three turns, which can leave it short of gas to return home.  It fires light ammunition up to twice per turn at the cost of 5 fuel points per attack.  Its secondary attack is a 250lb bomb which can be dropped once per sortie.  All attacks cost 5 fuel points.  It has a further advantage over other fighter-bombers in that it can climb to high-altitude with its last movement point after an attack, thus making it more survivable.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 2 times at a range of 1.  It has better reaction attacks at high altitude and has a very powerful dive bonus.  It struggles at low altitude.

@@51 P-47D25

A versatile American escort plane that can also be a fighter-bomber.  It has a high defense bonus but limited range.  Be careful as it can move over the course of three turns, which can leave it short of gas to return home.  Its primary attack consists of light guns which can be fired twice per turn.  Its secondary attack is a 500lb bomb which can be dropped once per sortie.  All attacks cost 5 fuel points.  It has a further advantage over other fighter-bombers in that it can climb to high-altitude with its last movement point after an attack, thus making it more survivable.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 2 times at a range of 2.  It has better reaction attacks at high altitude and has a very powerful dive bonus.  It struggles at low altitude.

@@52 P-47D40

A versatile American escort plane that can also be a fighter-bomber.  Its primary attack consists of light guns which can be fired twice per turn.  Its secondary attack is 2x1000lb bombs which can be dropped once per sortie.  All attacks cost 5 fuel points.  It has a further advantage over other fighter-bombers in that it can climb to high-altitude with its last movement point after an attack, thus making it more survivable.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 2 times at a range of 3.  It has better reaction attacks at high altitude and has a very powerful dive bonus.  It struggles at low altitude.

@@53 SAVE

Saving space for a future unit.

@@54 P-38H

An American interceptor, the P-38 series is the only American fighter that carries medium guns.  It has decent range and can fire three times per turn at the cost of 10 fuel points per attack on account of its dual engines.  It can fight at high and low-altitude and has a much greater range than the other medium-gun-equipped Allied fighter, the Spitfire series, though it has a worse defensive rating.  It would work well in teams when supported by P-47 or P-51 escorts.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 1 time at a range of 1.  It reacts better at high altitude and has a poor diving attack.

@@55 P-38J

An American interceptor, the P-38 series is the only American fighter that carries medium guns.  It has decent range and can fire three times per turn at the cost of 10 fuel points per attack on account of its dual engines.  It can fight at high and low-altitude and has a much greater range than the other medium-gun-equipped Allied fighter, the Spitfire series, though it has a worse defensive rating.  It would work well in teams when supported by P-47 or P-51 escorts.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 1 time at a range of 2.  It reacts better at high altitude and has a poor diving attack.

@@56 P-51B

A long-range, fast fighter plane that can escort Allied bombers to Berlin and back.  Fires light guns up to twice per turn and each attack costs 5 fuel.  Very strong defensively and can spot units 2 spaces away.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, the P-51B will react 2 times at a range of 3.

@@57 P-51D

The P-51D is the pinnacle of Allied propeller fighters in the game, and much more practicla for their typical missions than jets.  The Delta series can stay in the air two more turns than the Bravo, meaning that it can loiter in Germany and chase down the Luftwaffe as they land and refuel before strafing them on the ground.  Fires light guns up to twice per turn and each attack costs 5 fuel.  Very strong defensively and can spot units 2 spaces away.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, the P-51d will react 2 times at a range of 4, and is the only American propeller-driven fighter that can intercept jets, though the odds of it doing so are not good.

@@58 P-80

American jet fighter that can attack up to 10 times per turn, though at a great cost (50 fuel per attack).  Attacking the full 10 times would also leave this fighter exceptionally vulnerable to enemy operations.  A better strategy is likely to attack 4-5 times and then flee at high speed.  These units are very vulnerable to being shot while on airfields and care should be taken to station them only at well-defended fields.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Defensively, the P-80 can make 2 reactive attacks at a range of 5, but this would require it to end its turn airborne, which would leave it considerably exposed to attack in the United Kingdom.  It can intercept jets.

@@59 Stirling

Allied nighttime strategic bomber designed for attacking urban populations deep in the Reich.  At full strength, can drop two 250lb bombs per sortie at the cost of 20 fuel. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  As a dedicated night bomber, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked.  Its defensive armament has limited range - it will react 1 time at a range of 1.

@@60 Halifax

Allied nighttime strategic bomber designed for attacking urban populations deep in the Reich.  At full strength, can drop three 250lb bombs per sortie at the cost of 20 fuel. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  As a dedicated night bomber, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked.  Its defensive armament has limited range - it will react 1 time at a range of 1.

@@61 Lancaster

Allied nighttime strategic bomber designed for attacking urban populations deep in the Reich.  At full strength, can drop three 500lb bombs per sortie at the cost of 20 fuel. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom. As a dedicated night bomber, it has the potential to escape into the night when attacked.  Its defensive armament has limited range - it will react 1 time at a range of 1.

@@62 Pathfinder

Pathfinder units are meant to fly ahead of the main Bomber Command attack to drop "window" -- pieces of metal chaff that confuse German radar and night fighters and (it is hoped) prevent the actual attack from being discovered.  Window can be used to throw up false radar signatures for German defenses, or to create a "wall" that must be flown around or destroyed to reach the bomber stream. 

@@63 A-20

Allied tactical bomber that can attack at high or low altitude.  At full strength, it can drop two 250lb bombs per attack twice per sortie at the cost of 10 fuel per attack.  Tactical bombers are the only Allied aircraft that can bomb at high or low altitude.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  It will not react defensively - its speed is meant to protect it.

@@64 B-26

Allied tactical bomber that can attack at high or low altitude.  At full strength, it can drop two 250lb bombs per attack twice per sortie at the cost of 10 fuel per attack.  Tactical bombers are the only Allied aircraft that can bomb at high or low altitude.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  It will not react defensively - its speed is meant to protect it.


@@65 A-26

Allied tactical bomber that can attack at high or low altitude.  At full strength, it can drop three 250lb bombs per attack twice per sortie at the cost of 10 fuel per attack.  Tactical bombers are the only Allied aircraft that can bomb at high or low altitude.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  It will not react defensively - its speed is meant to protect it.
 

@@66 B-17F

Allied daylight strategic bomber designed for attacking high-altitude strategic targets like fuel refineries and industrial plants deep in the Reich.  It cannot attack at low altitude.  At full strength, can drop two 250lb bombs per sortie  at the cost of 20 fuel.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  The B-17F must be "killed" twice.  The first time it is killed, a damaged version takes its place.  This damaged version should be flown to England to have its veteran aircrew swapped into a new airframe by pressing '3'.  The B-17F is well-armed and will react defensively 2 times per turn at a range of 2, but only at high altitude.  All of these qualties make it a true "Flying Fortress."

@@67 B-24J

Allied daylight strategic bomber designed for attacking high-altitude strategic targets like fuel refineries and industrial plants deep in the Reich.  It cannot attack at low altitude (this is done for balancing aspects despite our knowledge that this type participated in the Ploesti raids and anti-submarine warfare).  At full strength, it will drop two 500lb bombs per sortie at the cost of 20 fuel. This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  It can outpace enemy escorts, though interceptors can catch it.  While not totally historical, this differentiates the unit a bit more from the B-17.  Defensively, it will react 1 time at a range of 1, but only at high altitude.

@@68 B-17G

Allied daylight strategic bomber designed for attacking high-altitude strategic targets like fuel refineries and industrial plants deep in the Reich.  At full strength, can drop three 250lb bombs per turn at the cost of 20 fuel.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Spawns defensive fire when attacked.  The B-17G must be "killed" twice.  The first time it is killed, a damaged version takes its place.  This must also be destroyed.  It is well-armed and will react defensively 2 times per turn at a range of 3, but only at high altitude.  All of these qualties make it a true "Flying Fortress."
 
@@69 Battle Group

A Battle Group represents all the major ground forces available to you.  These are meant to take territory and are a significantly better option than aircraft for mopping up urban centers as they can swipe away flak batteries with ease.  The only unit that can effectively stop them are enemy army groups.  This unit is also able to call up an artillery barrage by pressing "k," though this comes at the cost of all movement points.  This unit can make amphibious assaults.  When destroyed, there is a chance that the survivors will regroup a short distance away as a Depleted Battle Group.
 
@@70 Depleted Battle Group

When a Battle Group is destroyed, there is a chance that survivors will regroup a short distance away in the form of a Depleted Battle Group.  These can be used for the same purposes as the regular army group, but operate at reduced strength.  Moving two of these onto the same square and pressing 'backspace' will combine them, forming a full-strength Battle Group.

@@71 Egon Mayer

Egon Mayer was a Luftwaffe pilot credited with 102 kills, all of which were claimed over the Western Front.  He was the first fighter pilot to score 100 victories exclusively on the Western Front, and helped develop the tactic of striking the USAAF heavy bombers from 12 o'clock high.  He would go on to destroy 26 of the behemoths. 

Egon Mayer is one of several "Experten" units in the game which represent the absolute best German pilots available.  Graf can attack up to four times per turn, fires medium guns, and has substantial defensive strength making him very hard to kill.  He also cannot be intercepted via reactive attacks except by P-51s and Tempest fighters. If he is lost, the Germans will lose 500 fuel.

@@72 3.7-inch Flak

Heavy flak battery available to the Allies.  It can fire flak bursts towards the high-altitude daylight map and night maps with its primary and secondary attack keys, respectively.  It will be fortified at the start of each turn unless it can attack an enemy aircraft within range, so remember to activate any units you had been moving from one base to another.  It must be on "installation" terrain or within a city or strategic resource to fire ammo.  Please note that this ammo does not require any fuel to fire, thus it may be beneficial to stack these near likely targets to spare your fighters and fuel resources.  Defensively, it can make up to 4 reactive attacks per turn at a range of 2, and will do so against targets on any map, making this a formidable defensive weapon when concentrated.

NOTE: Reactive attacks against aircraft in cloud cover is halved until the development of "Proximity Fuses."

@@73 He111

A long-range strategic bomber available to the Germans should they choose to maintain the Blitz against England.  It carries 250lb bombs and its bombing runs cost 10 fuel points.  At full strength, it will drop two bombs per turn.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.  Will react with defensive fire 1 time at a range of 1 tiles if it or another aircraft near it is attacked.

@@74 Battle Group

A Battle Group represents all the major ground forces available to you.  These are meant to take territory and are a significantly better option than aircraft for mopping up urban centers as they can swipe away flak batteries with ease.  The only unit that can effectively stop them are enemy army groups.  This unit is also able to call up an artillery barrage by pressing "k," though this comes at the cost of all movement points.  This unit can make amphibious assaults.  When destroyed, there is a chance that the survivors will regroup a short distance away as a Depleted Battle Group.

@@75 Depleted Battle Group

When a Battle Group is destroyed, there is a chance that survivors will regroup a short distance away in the form of a Depleted Battle Group.  These can be used for the same purposes as the regular army group, but operate at reduced strength.  Moving two of these onto the same square and pressing 'backspace' will combine them, forming a full-strength Battle Group.

@@76 Sunderland

This long-range aircraft can only fly at low-altitude by day and is meant to locate German "wolf packs" and other naval vessels so that the Royal Navy can chase them down and destroy them.  It can also attack targets itself as it carries 1x 250lb bomb.  An attack run will reduce its movement points to 1, leaving it very vulnerable to nearby German fighters.  Attacks cost 20 fuel points.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  This unit will react defensively to German U-Boats and attempt to sink them.

@@77 Hispanos

Spitfires have one of the most powerful attacks in the game.  They are able to fire hispano cannons which can cut through enemy aircraft.  Unfortunately, the Spitfire's range limits the use of these.  

@@78 Hermann Graf

Herman Graf served on both the Eastern and Western Fronts and on September 26, 1942, became the first pilot in history to claim 200 victories.  He was then withdrawn from combat and posted to a fighter pilot training school before again taking up various operational commands, this time in the West.  One such command was that of JG 50, which was established as a special high-altitude unit to intercept Allied Mosquito intruders.  He would end the war with 212 kills.

Hermann Graf is one of several "Experten" units in the game which represent the absolute best German pilots available.  Graf can attack up to four times per turn, fires medium guns, and has substantial defensive strength making him very hard to kill.  He also cannot be intercepted via reactive attacks except by P-51s and Tempest fighters.  If he is lost, the Germans will lose 500 fuel.

@@79 Josef Priller

Josef "Pips" Priller was a leading Experten of the Luftwaffe, having been credited with 101 victories, all of which were claimed over the Western Front.  On January 11, 1943 he assumed command of JG 26 "Schlageter" and was one of the few Luftwaffe pilots to sortie against the Allied invasion of Normandy on D-Day.  He later took part in Operation Bodenplatte during the Battle of the Bulge, and ended the war as Inspekteur der Jagdflieger West.

Josef Priller is one of several "Experten" units in the game which represent the absolute best German pilots available.  Priller can attack up to four times per turn, fires medium guns, and has substantial defensive strength making him very hard to kill.  He also cannot be intercepted via reactive attacks except by P-51s and Tempest fighters.  If he is lost, the Germans will lose 500 fuel.

@@80 Adolf Galland

Adolf Galland was one of Germany's most dashing and successful fighter pilots.  He was credited with 104 victories, all of them against the Western Allies, making his accomplishment comparable to the highest scoring Experten on the Eastern Front.  He served as General der Jagdlieger from November 1941 to January 1945 and was forbidden from flying combat missions.  Placed on house arrest following internal disagreement with Göring, in March 1945, he was allowed to form a jet fighter unit, Jagdverband 44, which would go on to achieve a 4-to-1 kill ratio.

Adolf Galland is the most powerful fighter aicraft unit in the game.  The unit enjoys all the benefits of the Me262 jet fighter with increased reactive attack stats, and--importantly--very high defense.  Whereas most jets are very vulnerable if caught by interceptors, Adolf Galland has a very good chance to survive the engagement.  He also cannot be intercepted via reactive attacks except by P-51s and Tempest fighters. If he is killed, the Germans will lose 500 fuel.

@@81 Task Force

A naval task force represents a concentration of several capital ships and their support craft.  It is the most powerful unit in the game, capable of destroying anything in its path, but is vulnerable to massed air attack.  These are also the only units that can transport Battle Groups across the seas, so they must be carefully guarded lest you lose any chance you had of winning the scenario.  These can fire shells by pressing 'k.'

@@82 Task Force

A naval task force represents a concentration of several capital ships and their support craft.  It is the most powerful unit in the game, capable of destroying anything in its path, but is vulnerable to massed air attack.  These are also the only units that can transport Battle Groups across the seas, so they must be carefully guarded lest you lose any chance you had of winning the scenario.  These can fire shells by pressing 'k.'

@@83 332nd Fighter Group

The Tuskeegee Airmen are a special unit available to the Allies that operates from their Italian Theatre base to the south of the map.  As they travel a significant distance before even reaching the map, they have limited range on the map despite flying Mustangs.  This is the strongest defensive aircraft in the game.  Fires light guns up to twice per turn and each attack costs 5 fuel.  Very strong defensively and can spot units 2 spaces away.  This unit cannot land in population centers ore most airfields--only the Italian Theatre.  Defensively, it will make a reactive attack up to 3 times at a range of 4 tiles.  This, coupled with its world-class defense rating makes it the premier escort aircraft in the game.

@@84 15th Air Force Bombers

This unit represents Allied bombers operating from Italy and the Mediterranean.  It carries 250lb bombs and can drop up to three per sortie at the cost of 20 fuel.  This unit cannot land in population centers ore most airfields--only the Italian Theatre.  Will not react defensively when attacked and thus is heavily reliant on escort and vulnerable until the 332nd Fighter Group arrives.

@@85 Aircraft Factory I

This unit is tied to an aircraft factory (science) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the target on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's research (science) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@86 Aircraft Factory II

This unit is tied to an aircraft factory (science) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the target on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's research (science) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@87 Aircraft Factory III

This unit is tied to an aircraft factory (science) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the target on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's research (science) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@88 Refinery I

This unit is tied to a refinery (trade) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.  If the Allies destroy a German fuel refinery, the Germans will lose a bit of their fuel stockpile.

@@89 Refinery II

This unit is tied to a refinery (trade) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.  If the Allies destroy a German fuel refinery, the Germans will lose a bit of their fuel stockpile.

@@90 Refinery III

This unit is tied to a refinery (trade) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map, reducing the city's fuel production (trade) until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.  If the Allies destroy a German fuel refinery, the Germans will lose a bit of their fuel stockpile.

@@91 Urban Center I

This unit is tied to an urban center (happiness) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map as well as a firestorm terrain on the night map, making the tile worthless and the citizens discontent until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  Each Urban Center in a city increases the number of freighters that can be offloaded per turn.  Each Urban Center determines the level of refinery, factory, and aircraft factory that can be built in the city (Refinery I requires Urban Center I and so on). It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@92 Urban Center II

This unit is tied to an urban center (happiness) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map as well as a firestorm terrain on the night map, making the tile worthless and the citizens discontent until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  Each Urban Center in a city increases the number of freighters that can be offloaded per turn.  Each Urban Center determines the level of refinery, factory, and aircraft factory that can be built in the city (Refinery I requires Urban Center I and so on).  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@93 Urban Center III

This unit is tied to an urban center (happiness) improvement in a particular city on the low-altitude daylight map.  The destruction of this unit removes the improvement and creates rubble terrain near the city on the low-altitude map as well as a firestorm terrain on the night map, making the tile worthless and the citizens discontent until the improvement is rebuilt, which also respawns the unit and restores the terrain.  Each Urban Center determines the level of refinery, factory, and aircraft factory that can be built in the city (Refinery I requires Urban Center I and so on).  Each Urban Center in a city increases the number of freighters that can be offloaded per turn.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@94 Gun Battery

Defensive position that can fire shells at ground and naval targets when placed on "installation" terrain.  While expensive to build, it could be worth bolstering the Atlantic Wall with more of these units to keep invasions at bay.  These will react defensively to any army group that attempts to land from the sea.

@@95 Light Guns

Represents the "light" gun packages typically found on escort fighters.  Few American planes carried cannons, with Americans opting instead for 50.caliber machine guns on most fighters.  Likewise, Me109s - though often armed with heavy cannon - did not carry much ammo.  Its attack strength can be increased by 1 per each of the following technologies: Tactics I, Tactics II, and Tactics III.  Effects are cumulative.

@@96 Medium Guns

Represents the usual gun packages found on most German interceptors and most British fighters (typically, a 20mm cannon of some sort).  The American P-38 fighters also carry this ammo.  Its attack strength can be increased by 1 per each of the following technologies: Tactics I, Tactics II, and Tactics III.  Effects are cumulative.

@@97 Heavy Guns

Represents the heavy gun packages found on most German jets.  For continuity of sound, as well as to better differentiate jet fighters, the American P-80 and British Meteor also carry this ammo.  Its attack strength can be increased by 1 per each of the following technologies: Tactics I, Tactics II, and Tactics III.  Effects are cumulative.

@@98 250lb Bomb

Somewhat powerful munition dropped by certain aircraft, typically strategic bombers.  

@@99 500lb Bomb

Moderately powerful munition dropped by certain aircraft.  

@@100 1000lb Bomb

Very powerful bomb dropped by a select few aircraft such as the Ju87-G.  

@@101 Window

Window is dropped by British pathfinder units with the objective of confusing German radar and fighters.  Because it is invisible to attack and radar has a 1 point attack value, radar will self destruct upon contacting this, rendering it ineffective.  Aircraft won't self distruct, but because window has the same "sight picture" / "return" as other invisible units, it is likely that the aircraft may fire upon it, thinking it is a target of value.  They will then find their attack wasted on metal chaff.

@@102 H.W. Schnaufer

Heinz-Wolfgang Schnaufer was the highest-scoring night fighter ace in history, with 121 victories claimed, mostly against four-engine bombers of RAF Bomber Command.  He became so widely feared by Allied pilots that he was nicknamed, "The Spook of St. Trond" as that was his unit's base in Belgium.  He would end the war as Geschwaderkommodore of NJG 4 before being captured by the British.

Heinz-Wolfgang Schnaufer is one of several "Experten" units in the game which represent the absolute best German pilots available.  Schnaufer can attack up to four times per turn, fires medium guns, and has substantial defensive strength making him very hard to kill.  He also cannot be intercepted via reactive attacks except by P-51s and Tempest fighters.  If he is lost, the Germans will lose 500 fuel.

@@103 Air-to-Air Rockets

Very powerful munition fired by bomber destroyers (Me110 and Me410) as well as the Fw190A8.  Rockets can often destroy a bomber in one turn.

@@104 Flak Burst

Heavy flak fired by German 88mm Flak batteries, Flak Trains, and British 3.7-inch guns.  Their primary attack fires bursts that can reach the high-altitude daylight map.  Their secondary attack fires bursts that can reach the night map.  These can only be fired from installation, industrial, or city terrain, unless they are fired from a flak train which can also shoot from railtrack and urban tiles.

@@105 Damaged B-17F

The B-17 was notorious for being difficult to shoot down.  There are numerous anectdotes of German fighter pilots shaking their heads in disbelief as they watched severly wounded "Flying Fortresses" fly off on 1 engine.  In this scenario, they are a very difficult unit to destroy, as you essentially must destroy it twice - the first time you destroy the aircraft, it is replaced by a "damaged" version that is just as tough, but goes much slower - leading it to become a straggler and potentially not to be able to reach home, if it is far enough away.  The Allies should strive to bring these home and then transfer the experienced crew over to a new bomber.

@@106 Neutral Territory

This unit is designed to prevent either player from violating neutral airspace (Ireland, Spain, Switzerland, and Sweden).

@@107 Damaged B-17G

The B-17 was notorious for being difficult to shoot down.  There are numerous anectdotes of German fighter pilots shaking their heads in disbelief as they watched severly wounded "Flying Fortresses" fly off on 1 engine.  In this scenario, they are a very difficult unit to destroy, as you essentially must destroy it twice - the first time you destroy the aircraft, it is replaced by a "damaged" version that is just as tough, but goes much slower - leading it to become a straggler and potentially not to be able to reach home, if it is far enough away.  The Allies should strive to bring these home and then transfer the experienced crew over to a new bomber. 

@@108 P-38L

An American interceptor, the P-38 series is the only American fighter that carries medium guns.  It has decent range and can fire three times per turn at the cost of 10 fuel points per attack on account of its dual engines.  It can fight at high and low-altitude and has a much greater range than the other medium-gun-equipped Allied fighter, the Spitfire series, though it has a worse defensive rating.  It would work well in teams when supported by P-47 or P-51 escorts.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.  Defensively, it can react 1 time at a range of 3.  It reacts better at high altitude and has an improved diving attack over earlier P-38s, due to added dive flaps.

@@109 Historic Target

Throughout the game the Allies will receive a series of prompts asking that they attack a particular target such as Schweinfurt or the prison at Amiens.  The Allied objective is to destroy this historic target unit near that location and if they do that, there is generally a reward.  Allied failure generally rewards the Germans instead.  Please consult "Appendix D: Historic Missions" in the readme for more information.

@@110 Torpedo

U-Boats fire torpedos which have a range of 1.  A U-Boat may fire two torpedos per turn.  

@@111 Aircraft Carrier

Both sides can produce aircraft carriers to guard (or raid) convoys.  Only certain aircraft can land on carriers, all others will not be allowed onboard via events.  The following aircraft had (or had planned) naval equivalents and are allowed on the carrier in this scenario: Spitfires, Hurricanes, Me109s, and Ju87s.  These aircraft can rearm on the carrier.

@@112 Light Shells - Save

Save for later 

@@113 Medium shells - Save

Save for later

@@114 Artillery Barrage

Allied and German Army Groups are 'k' units that can call up an artillery barrage for the cost of all movement points.  This is meant to help them soften up difficult targets, such as other army groups, before committing to battle.  

@@115 Convoy

The Allies receive three convoy units every 1, 2 or 3 turns.  The frequency depends on how many military ports are intact in Germany.  These units should be steeered towards ports in Britain.  Once they arrive, press 'k' for a small fuel bonus as well as several freight trains.

@@116 Light Flak

Light flak is a very dangerous ammunition type fired by the Sdkfz 7/2, 3.7cm Flak, and 40mm Bofors units.  It is likely to do much damage to enemy aircraft as flying low over enemy territory is exceptionally dangerous.

@@117 Yak-3

When the Allies invade northwest Europe, they receive a technology via events that allows them to research the Vistula-Oder Offensive tech.  Once this technology is received, the Russian front "opens up" and the Red Air Force can be built to harrass the Germans from the east.  The Yak-3 is a low-level fighter aircraft meant to escort Russian close air support IL-2 aircraft.  This unit can only fly at low-altitude during the day.  It is armed with medium guns and can attack up to two times per turn, at a cost of 5 fuel per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers or most airfields -- only the Russian Front City.  Defensively, it will react 1 time at a range of 1.

@@118 Il-2

When the Allies invade northwest Europe, they receive a technology via events that allows them to research the Vistula-Oder Offensive tech.  Once this technology is received, the Russian front "opens up" and the Red Air Force can be built to harrass the Germans from the east.  The Il-2 is a ground attack aircraft meant to attack German army units to support the Russian offensive on the drive towards Berlin.  It is the only air unit with 40 hit points making it very difficult to kill. This unit can only fly at low-altitude during the day.  It carries a 1000lb bomb and can attack up to two times per turn, at a cost of 5 fuel per attack.  This unit cannot land in population centers or most airfields -- only the Russian Front City.

@@119 3.7cm Flak

This is light flak available to the Germans on the low-altitude day map and also the night map.  It fires more powerful ammunition than the heavy flak, but this ammunition cannot reach high-altitude targets.  Defensively, it can make 1 reactive attack per turn at a range of 2.  Flying at low altitude over enemy territory is a very dangerous mission!

@@120 Ju-188 (Photo Recon)

In this scenario, both sides start with moderately-developed cities, and a big part of the strategy is building them up further.  Thus, it is important to make recon flights over enemy territory to get a better grasp on what your opponent is doing.  This unit allows you to do that.  It can travel on both daytime maps and is invisible until attack, giving it some degree of survivability.  It can take aerial photographs of enemy cities by pressing 'k' over land, which calls up the aerial photograph unit (spy).  This unit has one spy function: investigate city.  This will only work over land - never water, so you must penetrate the coastline to take photographs.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields.

@@121 V1 Launch Site

This is a special unit that can fire "V1 Buzzbomb" units when situated on "installation" terrain.  Only the Germans may build this.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@122 V2 Launch Site

This is a special unit that can fire "V2 Rocket" units when situated on "installation" terrain.  Only the Germans may build this.  It cannot be protected by air units by stacking them on top of it - they will be moved via lua events.

@@123 V1 Buzzbomb

This "vengeance weapon" can be fired by the Germans from V1 Launch Site units that are positioned on "installation" terrain.  This unit can target population centers by night but not other strategic targets as it is far too imprecise for that.  This is fairly slow and can sometimes be intercepted.  

@@124 V2 Rocket

This "vengeance weapon" can be fired by the Germans from V2 Launch Site units that are positioned on "installation" terrain.  This unit can target population centers by night but not other strategic targets as it is far too imprecise for that.  This travels fast enough that it will not be intercepted.

@@125 Mosquito (Photo Recon)

In this scenario, both sides start with moderately-developed cities, and a big part of the strategy is building them up further.  Thus, it is important to make recon flights over enemy territory to get a better grasp on what your opponent is doing.  This unit allows you to do that.  It can travel on both daytime maps and is invisible until attack, giving it some degree of survivability.  It can take aerial photographs of enemy cities by pressing 'k' over land, which calls up the aerial photograph unit (spy).  This unit has one spy function: investigate city.  This will only work over land - never water, so you must penetrate the coastline to take photographs.  This unit cannot land in population centers - only airfields in the United Kingdom.

@@126 Wolf Pack
Germany has the ability to build fearsome groups of submarines, called "wolf packs," to attack British freighters out at sea.  It fires torpedos by pressing "k" and should be used to attack Allied convoys.  While it will likely take several hits to destroy a convoy, even weakening it will mean that it will be delayed to port.  Wolf Packs should team up with Fw200 Condor units on search and destroy missions to defeat Allied convoys.  The cost of wolf packs is directly affected by the amount of military ports that Germany possesses. 

@TERRAIN_AND_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the TERRAIN.PDE text file in the ;original Civilopedia. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Settlers will be the 50'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@TERRAIN_INDEX
-1,			; Desert
-1,			; Plains
-1,			; Grassland
-1,			; Forest
-1,			; Hills
-1,			; Mountains
-1,			; Tundra
-1,			; Glacier
-1,			; Swamp
-1,			; Jungle
-1,			; Ocean
-1,			; Oasis
-1,			; Buffalo
-1,			; Grassland
-1,			; Pheasant
-1,			; Coal
-1,			; Gold
-1,			; Game
-1,			; Ivory
-1,			; Peat
-1,			; Gems
-1,			; Fish
-1,			; Desert Oil
-1,			; Wheat
-1,			; Grassland
-1,			; Silk
-1,			; Wine
-1,			; Iron
-1,			; Furs
-1,			; Glacier Oil
-1,			; Spice
-1,			; Fruit
-1,			; Whales
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

;Terrain Types
@@Desert
Deserts are arid stretches of land characterized by an annual rainfall of less than ten inches. Adding to the dry environment is the fact that, because the desert atmosphere has such low humidity, evaporation of moisture from the ground exceeds precipitation. Many deserts are characterized by extremely high daytime temperatures and equally low night time temperatures. Only the hardiest plants and animals can survive in the harsh desert environment. Despite the perception that deserts are composed of useless sand, most desert soil is naturally fertile because little water moves through the desert to carry away nutrients. Through the use of artificial irrigation, humans have managed to grow crops in desert environments. If this is not done carefully, it can lead to irreversible environmental damage when the meager water supply that is tapped for the irrigation process is depleted.

@@Forest
Extensive areas of land covered by a thick growth of trees and related ground vegetation are classified as forests. There are several different types of forest, determined primarily by climate and the type of vegetation they contain. Forests of some type exist on nearly every continent in the world. Forests are a valuable source of natural resources, providing wood for paper products, building, and other purposes. The harvesting of trees must be done carefully, however. If not done in moderation, lumbering can destroy the natural habitat for indigenous animal species, and destroy the ecology of the land. Government regulations limiting the amount of trees that can be cut, and requiring the lumber industry to plant new trees to replace what they have harvested, help to prevent major ecological damage as a result of deforestation.

@@Glacier
Glaciers are large masses of ice and snow found in mountain regions, and near the north and south poles of the planet, where the rate at which snow and ice melt is less than the rate of snowfall. There are several varieties of glaciers: alpine and piedmont glaciers, which are formed in the valleys of high mountain regions; and ice cap and continental glaciers that may cover large portions of a continent. All glaciers are similar in composition, consisting of upper layers of softer snow and ice crystals, and lower layers of highly compressed, solid ice. Although some glaciers are stationary, some may move anywhere from a few feet to more than 100 feet each day, carving and reshaping the land as they go. Glacial regions are inhospitable, containing little animal life, no plant life, and virtually no resources of any kind.

@@Grassland
The areas of land between desert regions and forests in temperate and tropical climates usually consist of grasslands. These fertile regions, covered with various types of vegetation, once occupied large areas of North and South America, Africa, and Eurasia. These areas are characterized by marked wet and dry seasons, with annual periods of drought. Although many grasslands are naturally occurring, grasslands can also be created through deforestation of woodland areas. Grasslands are often cultivated and used as pastures and grazing lands. Because of the relatively low rainfall in these regions, the topsoil is high in nutrients. Grasslands are, therefore, well suited for growing crops, especially grain crops.

@@Hills
Rolling areas of the countryside, often found between plains and more mountainous regions are known as hills, or foothills. These areas, often covered with rich soil and grasses or heavily forested, are rich in resources. Coal, iron, lead, copper, and even gold and silver may be found in these regions, making them profitable areas for the mining industry. In areas where the below-ground resources are scarce, hill areas are often cultivated for agricultural purposes. Certain crops such as coffee and grapes thrive in these regions, given the proper climate.

@@Jungle
In heavily forested areas where rainfall is high, the growth of both trees and other indigenous plants is profuse. The dense, tangled environment of the jungle is home to wide varieties of plant and animal life. Although mineral deposits and fruit-bearing plants can sometimes be found in these regions, jungles tend to lack both mineral and food resources. This, combined with the sheer density of the native plant life, makes jungles inhospitable to humans. In order to make these areas more useful, jungles are often destroyed through forestation and burning to yield areas of grassland. While this improves the usefulness of the land for humans, it destroys the habitat of the indigenous animals of the region. It is estimated that hundreds of undiscovered species of insect and animal life are made extinct every day as a result of the destruction of jungles and rain forests.

@@Mountains
Mountains are areas of high elevation, usually consisting of a chain of rugged peaks and valleys. Most mountains are formed when the plates making up the Earth's crust impact or slide against one another, raising layers of rock above the surrounding land. Mountains can also be formed by volcanic action, or through the effects of erosion. Although generally poor agricultural regions, mountains are often a source of great mineral wealth, with large deposits of gold and other valuable ores. Aside from their economic value, mountains provide a natural defensive barrier, shielding human settlements from invaders. Extensive mountain ranges can also greatly affect the weather patterns of a region by blocking and diverting wind and storms.

@@Ocean
The oceans and seas of the world cover almost three-quarters of our planet. They are home to millions of life forms ranging from microscopic plankton to whales, the largest mammals in the world. The animals and plants that inhabit the sea provide an excellent source of food. For centuries, coastal and island cultures have thrived on the resources and easy access to trade provided by the sea. Unfortunately, in many parts of the world, a combination of over-harvesting of marine animals and increased pollution have begun to threaten fragile coastal ecologies. Some species of marine life are seriously threatened. For example, the whaling industry, which thrived in the 19th and early 20th century, is responsible for hunting certain species of whales to near-extinction. Government regulations concerning the dumping of pollutants and the indiscriminate harvesting of marine life are constantly being updated in response to these growing problems.

@@Plains
Plains are vast, open tracts of land, usually with very few trees and covered with vegetation such as sage brush and various grasses. Plains are similar to grasslands, except that the topsoil is often not as well suited for growing food. Often, rich deposits of minerals are also found in plains regions. The indigenous plants of the plains makes them well suited for grazing. Large herds of buffalo and other animals can often be found roaming the area. With the proper irrigation, plains can be easily cultivated into adequate farmland for the production of grains and the raising of livestock.

@@River
Fed by natural springs, snow melt, and small tributary streams, rivers flow from mountains and other upland sources into larger rivers, lakes, and oceans. Rivers can be found in almost any terrain, from lush jungles and forests to arid desert regions. Since the dawn of civilization, towns and cities have grown up around rivers because the land in river valleys is usually very fertile, and well-suited for farming. In addition, the river provided easy and quick access between towns by boat for trade and travel. Water could be channeled from rivers via aqueducts to cities some distance from the river for the purposes of irrigation. Rivers are also good sources of mineral resources, and can provide power to run machinery and generate electricity.

@@Swamp
Swamps are wetlands which are largely uninhabitable by humans. These areas are usually flooded with water, ranging in depth from a few inches to several feet, due to heavy rainfall and overflow from nearby lakes and rivers. Although inhospitable for human life, swamps are teeming with both animal and plant life. Certain spices and useful substances such as peat, which is used as a fertilizer, can be found in abundance in certain swamp areas. Swampland is often drained, and converted into grassland and plains in order to make it more useful for resource and food production. However, environmental groups have been successful in slowing the destruction of wetlands, and setting up sanctuaries for the wildlife that inhabits these regions.

@@Tundra
In the far-northern regions of the world, and in isolated regions in the Antarctic, there are thousands of miles of barren plains known as tundra. These regions have an extremely low average temperature, and a very short summer season. The primary characteristic of the tundra is a layer of permanently frozen soil known as permafrost just below the topsoil layer, which prevents many plants from taking root and making agriculture all but impossible. Like deserts, the tundra receives little precipitation; however, the flat, frozen ground keeps groundwater from draining, forming bogs where various grasses, moss, and other simple vegetation can grow. Despite the harsh environment, a wide variety of animal life flourishes in the tundra, providing possible sources of food, and providing trade potential for the fur and trapping industry.

;Special Resources

@@Buffalo
The plains areas of the world are inhabited by roaming herds of many different varieties of animals. These herd animals have been hunted, both for sport and for food and pelts, throughout history. Some of these animals can even be domesticated and used for farming and other purposes. One of the most widespread herd animals is the buffalo, various species of which are found throughout the world. Bison, commonly referred to as buffalo, were once the most dominant species of the North American plains. Bison were a valuable resource to native American tribes, who hunted the animals as a source of food and pelts. When European settlers began to expand to the west, the bison was hunted to the brink of extinction by thrill-seekers and sports hunters.

@@Coal
More than 300 million years ago, plant life growing in swamps began to decompose. Layers of sand and mud covered the decomposing plants, and the decaying plants were compressed by the combined weight of water and sediment. Over time, the plant matter hardened and became coal. Coal deposits are mined all over the world, and coal was one of the major fuel sources in the world through the 1970's. In many countries, concern over the environmental effects of the burning of coal has led to a decline in its use. The smoke produced by burning coal has a high acid content, and creates an environmental condition known as "acid rain", which is harmful to plant and animal life. Despite the environmental concerns, some of the largest coal mines in the U.S. each still produce more than 450,000 metric tons annually, making coal mining a very profitable industry.

@@Fish
Prevailing winds, ocean currents, and deep water trenches can often combine to produce conditions that are optimum for fishing. In areas such as the Pacific coast of Central and South America, offshore winds push the warm surface waters out to deeper waters. Underwater currents push cold, nutrient-rich water from deep below the surface back toward the coast. The high concentration of nutrients in this colder water, caused by decomposition of organic matter at extreme depths, creates an ideal environment for fish and other sea life. Civilizations with access to areas such as this can significantly increase their food supply by establishing a thriving fishing industry.

@@Fruit
The tropical environments that are so conducive to the growth of jungles also provide the perfect environment for growing certain fruits. Bananas, for example, originally native to the jungles of Southeast Asia, are an excellent, naturally occurring food crop. Many such fruits, including the banana, can be transplanted and grown in similar climates all over the world.

@@Furs
Throughout history, animal furs have been valuable commodities for trade and sale. Many different types of animals including minks, rabbits, and beavers have been captured by trappers for the purpose of obtaining their pelts for use in the making of clothing and other items. The exploration and colonization of the New World caused the fur industry to boom by making a variety of furs readily available. By the late 1800's, farms were set up specifically to raise animals for the fur industry. Starting in the 1970's, environmentalists and animal rights groups have lobbied to change public opinion concerning the harvesting and sale of furs. Despite these vocal groups, the fur industry remains profitable, if not as wide spread, in the world today.

@@Game (Forest)
@@Pheasant
Since ancient times, hunting of game animals has been important both for survival and for sport. Forested areas containing a large concentration of deer, elk, and smaller game were very valuable as a source of food for nearby settlements and cities. Though the widespread practice of farming domestic animals for food purposes has made hunting for sport much more common than hunting for food, certain animals such as geese, ducks, and deer are still frequently hunted and killed for food.

@@Musk Ox
Settlements in the sparse tundra regions of the arctic cannot raise crops and domestic animals for food due to the harsh conditions. They are, therefore, much more dependent on the hunting and trapping of local wildlife for food. The many species of birds and small game, as well as larger animals such as elk and caribou, provide a source of food in an environment that is otherwise barren and inhospitable.

@@Gems
Gemstones, treasured throughout time for their beauty and value, have always been a sought-after commodity. Most gemstones, such as diamonds, are mined in various areas throughout the world, most notably Africa. Some of the most notable gem deposits, however, have been found in archeological digs. The ruins of ancient civilizations in the jungles of Central and South America have sometimes been found to hide large quantities of precious and semi-precious gems, as well as gold and other items of value. The discovery of such a site can lead to an increase in trade in the areas surrounding the dig, as both professional and amateur treasure hunters swarm to the region to seek their fortune.

@@Gold
Gold has always been one of the most highly valued metals in the world. It is used in the manufacture of everything from jewelry to electronics, and has been established as the basis for monetary systems world wide. The factor that makes gold valuable is its rarity. Although gold can be found in many different areas, the most valuable deposits are large veins of gold ore running through mountains. When a large deposit is found, mining the deposit greatly boosts the economy in settlements and cities near the mine. An historical example of this phenomenon are the many towns that grew and prospered over a relatively short time during the California gold rush in America during the 1800's.

@@Iron
When early civilizations began to use metal to construct tools and weapons, the most commonly used metal was bronze. Bronze had the advantage of being readily available and easy to work with. Unfortunately, it was too soft to hold an effective edge. In the mid-14th century in central Europe, iron replaced bronze as the metal of choice, and the Iron Age was begun. Since this time, iron has been a valuable commodity. Deposits of iron and iron ore found in mountains are mined and processed for use in their raw form, and in the production of steel.

@@Ivory
Ivory, the hard substance of which elephant tusks are composed, is highly sought for the carving of ornamental objects. Most ivory is obtained from the tusks of African elephants, but other sources include the tusks of walruses and the fossilized tusks of prehistoric elephants and mammoths found in the northern glacial regions of the world. Although importation of ivory has been banned in many countries due to the fact that many of the species from which it is obtained are now endangered, the ivory trade was once a widespread and profitable venture.

@@Oasis
In rare instances, underground reservoirs or rivers beneath a desert may run near the surface, forming a lake in the middle of an otherwise barren region of land. The presence of water allows plants to grow, and may even attract animal life. An oasis makes it easier for human settlements to survive in desert climates by providing rich soil for the growing of food crops. Since they are so rare, oases are fiercely guarded by desert dwellers who are lucky enough to stumble across them.

@@Oil
Oil has been known to humans since ancient times. Oil deposits found on the surface were used for centuries for waterproofing and fuel purposes. But it was not until the coming of the Industrial Revolution that civilization began to form a dependence on petroleum products. The widespread use of oil for fuel, lubrication, and other purposes led to a search for larger supplies. In the mid 1800's, the first oil wells were drilled, marking the beginning of a tremendously important and profitable industry. Today, with the world's oil supplies dwindling and the demand for oil constantly rising, oil is a more valuable resource than ever.

@@Peat
Some bogs and swamps contain a brown organic material known as peat. Peat is made up of partially-decomposed plant matter, and has a high carbon content. Although dried peat is sometimes compressed and burned as fuel, the most valuable use for peat is as a fertilizer and mulch for farming and gardening. The high mineral content and its ability to retain moisture make peat well-suited to this purpose.

@@Silk
Silk has been a valuable commodity for textiles since its properties were discovered in the 27th century BC. Silk is obtained from the cocoon of the silkworm moth, which was originally native to the forests of China. The fine fibers of the cocoon is woven into cloth, which is used to make all types of clothing. Raw silk was obtained only from Asia until 550 AD, when two monks sent from the Roman Empire secretly stole silkworm eggs from China and brought them to Europe. Eventually, silkworms were found in many areas throughout the world. Less expensive synthetic fibers of the 20th century led to a decline in the silk market, but silk is still very popular in many types of clothing and other goods.

@@Spice
Certain types of plants have evolved in such a way that they produce mild toxins or repellents that make their odor or flavor distasteful to animals. Oddly enough, many of these plants were sought by humans because of these smells and tastes. A profitable spice trade was begun by merchants in the Middle East before 2000 BC. Spices are used now, as they were in the ancient world, to preserve food and enhance its flavor. Although spices are now commercially cultivated and prepared, most types can still be found in abundance in nature. Many of the most popular spices, such as cloves and nutmeg, are extracted from plants that grow in tropical or swampy regions of the world.

@@Whales
Whaling, the hunting and killing of whales for oil and other byproducts, was practiced as an organized industry as early as 875 AD. By the 16th century, it had risen to be the principle industry in the coastal regions of Spain and France. The industry spread throughout the world, and became increasingly profitable in terms of trade and resources. Some regions of the world's oceans, along the animals' migration routes, had a particularly dense whale population, and became the targets for large concentrations of whaling ships, and the industry continued to grow well into the 20th century. The depletion of some whale species to near extinction led to the banning of whaling in many countries by 1969, and to a worldwide cessation of whaling as an industry in the late 1980's.

@@Wheat
Wheat has been a staple crop for civilizations occupying temperate zones of the planet since pre-historic times. There is archeological evidence that bread wheat was cultivated in southern Turkestan as early as 6000 BC, though naturally occurring wheat was probably used for food purposes much earlier. Throughout the temperate zones, wheat has become the primary food crop. It is particularly well suited for growth in vast, open plains like those found in the central United States.

@@Wine
Wine, a beverage made from fermented grapes, was first produced as early as 6000 BC. Its use spread throughout the Middle East and Egypt, and it quickly became a popular beverage of the ancient world. The grapes used for the making of wine are grown in many different regions of the world. Most vineyards are located in hills and valleys of temperate regions. Wine making as an industry has been perfected over several centuries. Many regions such as the Rhine and Loire valleys of Europe are well known for their fine wines, and derive a significant portion of their economy from wine making.

@@Test
This is a test to see if this worked

@GOVERNMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the GOVERN.PDE text file in the ;original Civilopedia. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Fundamentalism will be the 5'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below begining with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no desription, do not list or index.
;
@@GOVERNMENT_INDEX
0,			; Anarchy
3,			; Despotism
5,			; Monarchy
1,			; Grand Alliance
4,			; Fundamentalism
2,			; Axis Alliance
6,			; Democracy
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Anarchy
Anarchy represents not so much a government type as the lack of any stable government. Anarchy occurs when your civilization's government falls, or when you decide to have a Revolution. After a few turns of Anarchy, you can rebuild a new government. Anarchy is similar to Despotism, except that the corruption rate is VERY HIGH. However, no taxes are collected during a period of Anarchy, and no scientific research is conducted.

@@Grand Alliance
The Allied Grand Alliance is represented by the Communism government renamed.  There are a few tweaks in the Cosmic Principles from the base game:

* Each unit beyond the eighth unit costs one Shield per turn.
* Settlers eat two Food per turn.
* Up to three military units in each city provide security, each making two unhappy citizens content.
* Fuel/Security/Research rates cannot be set higher than 80%.

While in the base game this government doesn't have any fuel diversion (corruption), we have changed the palace distance to be equivalent to 10, so there will be less fuel diverted to other theatres than the Axis, but there will still be some.  The Allies did, after all, agree on a strategy of "Germany first."

@@Axis Alliance
The Axis Alliance is represented by the Republic government renamed.  This allows the Germans to have a research advantage, but also forces them to commit greater resources to security, and to reduce the number of units that each airfield can support.

* Each unit costs one shield per turn.
* Construction Teams eat two Food per turn.
* Fuel/Security/Research rates cannot be set higher than 80%.

Having gotten themselves involved in a multi-front war, the Germans find that considerable fuel stocks must be diverted to other theatres (corruption).  Hiring quartermasters can help alleviate this.

@@Democracy
This is not used in this scenario.

@@Fundamentalism
This is not used in this scenario.

@@Monarchy
This is not used in this scenario.

@@Republic
This is not used in this scenario.

@CONCEPT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
;Translation Note: The text in this section comes, verbatim, from the CONCEPT.PDE text file in the ;original Civilopedia. (French and German versions are .PDF and .PDG respectively.)
;

@@The Three Maps
This scenario utilizes three maps, all of which interact with each other in some way:

Low-Altitude Daylight Map (map 0): This is the map where all daylight aircraft will take off and land.  You will also find an extensive rail system for moving freight trains from cities to air fields to disband and produce aircraft.  Flak on this map tends to be heavy and dangerous.  You should take care when flying low.  The allies must capture cities on this map to win the game.

High-Altitude Daylight Map (map 1): Most strategic bombing targets are located on this map.  You’ll notice that there is a terrain called “cloud cover.”  Aircraft have a defensive bonus when situated on this terrain and it may be worth coordinating your raids to take advantage of this.  On the other hand, it’s predictable.  Aircraft perched on this map can bounce aircraft on the lower map.

High-Altitude Night Map (map 2): Bomber Command takes to the skies to do battle with the Nachtjagdflieger on this map, as all population center targets are located here.  This map is a bit of a combination of a high-altitude and low-altitude map because it features airfields for the night forces as well as rail tracks, but also high-altitude targets.  Some ground forces, like freight trains, can go on this map.

You will also note the search lights in the last screen shot above – Construction teams can create this terrain on the night map.  It halves the defensiveness of any units caught in it, so it might be worthwhile to create a belt of these along likely enemy approaches.

Many aircraft can use native transport abilities to fly at different altitudes and therefore switch between map 0 and 1 at will by pressing “n”.  

Freight trains, Construction teams, and a few other units are able to move between the low-altitude daylight map and the night map by going to a switchyard and pressing “n.”

Allied air units are prohibiting from moving between the day and night maps.  The Germans, however, have the ability to transfer aircraft back and forth from daylight to nighttime operations once they have researched the “Wilde Sau” technology.

@@City Types and Production Limitations
There are two different types of cities in this scenario: airfields, and population centers.  

Airfields are the only cities that can produce aircraft, but they typically lack access to high-production terrain squares.  While you could theoretically build them next to such squares that are normally used by a city, they can’t develop their own.

Population centers, on the other hand, can build factories and a unit called the “Freight Trains” (assuming they have factories).  The point of the freight train unit is to take it from a population center, move it to an airfield, and disband it to help build an aircraft.

You are encouraged to create new cities in this scenario to expand and disperse your air force.  Each new city will automatically have the terrain below it changed to “airfield” and will also have the “airbase” improvement automatically built.  This prevents any factories or refineries from being built in the new airfield.  Airfields can never transition into population centers.  Building a city on the low-alt daylight map will build a twin city on the high-alt night map and vice versa.  

Do NOT land any aircraft in population centers.  They will be deleted at the start of the next turn (you will want to be careful with your “go to” commands as aircraft sometimes land in the nearest city).

@@Ammo and Fuel
Many units in this scenario (including all aircraft) have an attack rating of “0.”  To initiate combat, you must press either ‘k’ or in some cases ‘backspace’ to “call up” ammo which can be fired.  ‘k’ loads the ammo for the unit’s primary attack (in the case of fighters, typically machine gun or cannon rounds).  Some units (such as fighter bombers) can also load a secondary attack munition (typically a bomb) by pressing ‘backspace.’  Finally, some units like flak batteries and radar installations press ‘k’ to fire ammo that can use native transport to the high-altitude daylight map, and ‘backspace’ to fire ammo that can use native transport to reach the high-altitude nighttime map.

To prevent units from having infinite ammo per turn, each press of ‘k’ or ‘backspace’ will reduce the firing unit’s movement points, often substantially.  Aircraft with a movement point of 1 cannot fire any ammo.

“Fuel” replaces “gold” in this scenario.  All aircraft require fuel to fly combat missions.  While they can take off and move around the map without any cost, whenever they call up ammo, fuel is deducted from your stockpile (treasury).  Typically, the number of engines of the aircraft determines the amount of fuel deducted, with 5 fuel being used per engine per attack.  Thus, most fighters cost 5 fuel to launch an attack, most tactical bombers cost 10, and most heavy bombers cost 20.   Jet aircraft are more expensive – they cost anywhere from 25 – 50 fuel per attack.  Please see the appendix for a full list of ammo costs per unit.  You can also hit “tab” in-game to see the fuel cost (in addition to other information) for the active unit.

Because aircraft require fuel to fight, targeting fuel refineries for strategic bombing runs is a very good choice.  When enough of these are destroyed on the map, the opposition may find it very difficult to launch operations.  

Though there are a few trade units in this game (prototypes I and II), they do not increase fuel stores – they only contribute to technological progress.  Thus, the only way to increase your fuel stores is to build fuel refineries or devote more resources (tax rate) to fuel production.  You can also sell certain improvements if you are in a real pinch, but most cannot be sold.

@@Strategic Bombing
At its core, Over the Reich is a scenario about strategic bombing.  Whereas past versions of this scenario attempted to represent this in very abstract ways, Lua (and the gracious assistance of Knighttime and Prof. Garfield) allows a much more natural, familiar feel in this scenario.

You will notice on the high-altitude maps that there are certain “target” units – industries, refineries, aircraft factories, urban centers, military ports, and railyards.

Each unit correlates to a specific improvement in a city on the low-altitude map.  Destruction of the unit removes the improvement, and also changes local terrain from something beneficial to something useless.  Rebuilding the improvement restores the unit, and restores the terrain to something useful.  Thus, if the Allies successfully attack an “Industry I” unit on the high-altitude map near Essen, the city of Essen will have its “Industry I” (factory) improvement removed, and a terrain tile will change from “factory” to “rubble”.  Should the Germans rebuild the Industry I improvement in Essen, the “Industry I” unit will repopulate, and nearby terrain will be restored to “factory”.

VERY IMPORTANT: A core concept of this scenario is that both the Germans and Allies are supposed to build up their industry—they each start with only some developed cities.  You must not search for a suitable city to invest in with a “core Civ2” mindset, however, because most under-developed cities completely lack resources.  They GAIN resources once the improvements are built, because the building of the improvements also triggers a change to the terrain, which is much more lucrative.  

A city that starts surrounded by grassland and has very limited shields will have a terrain square that provides an additional 20 shields added to its territory once the Industry I, II, or III improvements are built.  In short, “don’t judge a book by its cover” when it comes to your cities.  Building improvements will improve their production dramatically.

Deciding which targets to attack (and to defend) is one of the main considerations in this game.  

VERY IMPORTANT: Do NOT place your attacking units on any “firestorm” or “rubble” terrain that is created on the high-altitude maps after a successful bombing run.  Any enemy aircraft that occupies a tile that a target unit needs to spawn to will be DELETED when the target unit attempts to spawn there (i.e., when the corresponding city rebuilds the improvement).  

@@Reactive Attacks
In the base game, one unit attempts to move into the tile of another unit to initiate combat between the two participants.  As most units in this scenario have an attack factor of 0, this wouldn’t work.  Thus, we’ve implemented a system where a unit can respond and defend itself when another unit calls up ammo.  We’ve taken the step further and let nearby units respond as well.

Aircraft don’t need to be on the same map to intercept others.  Fighter aircraft on the high-altitude map can intercept aircraft on the low-altitude map, and they even get a bonus for doing so because they are “bouncing” enemies from above.  A successful diving attack will yield massive damage.  This opens up some interesting tactical possibilities as you could attach some “high cover” fighter escorts to screen a low-altitude bombing raid.  If the enemy fails to recognize the danger, a successful bounce might leave the attackers shattered.

Strategic bombers also have reactive attacks, but in their case, it takes the form of their defensive fire.  Bombers will usually have a chance to inflict some damage on most interceptors (jets and bomber destroyers are the exceptions).  The damage inflicted isn’t particularly strong, but if the bombers travel in large formations then numerous bombers can cover each other.  With a reactive fire range of 2 tiles, large bomber boxes can be very difficult targets, and interceptors will need to carefully consider their targets (stragglers and those on the outskirts would be safest). 

Different aircraft have different probabilities of successfully intercepting other aircraft, or striking them with defensive fire.  If you are interested in knowing the exact probabilities of the attacks, you can open the events.lua file included with this scenario and search for local ds = {}.  This will take you to the top of the damage schedule section and you can then scroll down.  Instructions for how to read the section are included in the events.

There are a few basics to help you jump into the game:

* Bombers are more likely to be intercepted than fighters and tend to take more damage because they are bigger targets;
* Luftwaffe heavy fighters (such as the Me110) are more likely to be intercepted than light fighters (such as the Fw190);
* More advanced, faster aircraft tend to have a better chance of successful interceptions, and their range to intercept tends to be further as well;
* Aircraft tend to be more difficult to intercept at night than at day;
* While all German aircraft can switch between the day and night maps via the Wilde Sau method (see 8. Major Game Concepts, U. Wilde Sau), aircraft specifically designed for night operations (such as the He219) are much more likely to successfully intercept enemy aircraft at night than day fighters pressed into nighttime roles.
* Some aircraft do better at certain altitudes.  For example, the P-47 comes into its own at high altitude, but struggles at low altitude and won’t make nearly as many interceptions.  In contrast, the early Fw190s struggle at altitude but do better down low (The 109D9 and especially Ta152 will correct this as they were designed to be better at high altitude).
* There are only four propeller aircraft in the game that have any hope to intercept jets (and even they only have about a 20% chance of doing so): The Ta152, P-51D, Red Tails, and Tempest fighters.  Jets can intercept other jets if they happen to be in the air between turns, but this would be a very risky way to use these units.

@@Installation Terrain
There are certain units that can only fire within cities or on special “installation” terrain out in    the world.  These are flak batteries and gun batteries.  You will need to use your Construction Team units to change grassland to “installations” and then place the unit on these installations to use them.  Otherwise, pressing ‘k’ will accomplish nothing as no ammunition will fire.  These can only built on the low-altitude daylight map.  

@@Flak
Anti-aircraft batteries, or flak, are very important elements of your defenses.  Historically, Hitler favored high concentrations of flak batteries, calling them a “psychological crutch” for the German people.  In this scenario, they are less expensive to produce than aircraft, can be built in cities, and don’t cost any fuel to use.  Though these are all benefits, flak can be a little unreliable – the Luftwaffe’s quartermaster general, Hans-Georg von Seidel, once estimated that it took an average of 8,000 rounds for the 88mm flak 41 gun to shoot down one American bomber.  While it won’t take nearly as many in Over the Reich, flak is an imprecise weapon to balance its cheaper cost.  

Flak is used in two ways:

* Flak can directly fire on enemy forces by pressing ‘k’ (for daylight attacks) or ‘backspace’ (for night attacks) to call up a munition unit to attack the enemy. 
NOTE: In an aim of simplifying the process and shortening turns, activating a heavy flak unit (88mm Flak, Flak Train, and 3.7-inch Flak) near enemy aircraft will produce a text box advising that a raid is nearby, and on which map.  Unfortunately, no text box will appear if you select a flak unit from within a city screen.

* Flak is also a reaction unit, so it can be stacked near targets and will react when enemy bombers approach and drop bombs.  

NOTE: A text box will pop up to tell you that your aircraft has been attacked by flak.

There are several flak units, all of which serve a unique purpose:

--Light Flak--
The German 3.7cm Flak and British 40mm Bofors are light flak units that can appear on the low-altitude day map, and the night map.  They can only fire at low-level targets (including RAF Bomber Command, which tended to fly significantly lower than the USAAF).  They are strong defensive units but slow and expensive.  Their main purpose is to protect your airfields, which is why they can inhabit the day and night maps.  Their munitions are significantly stronger and more accurate than heavy flak, as flying at low altitude was fraught with danger.

--Mobile Flak--
Germany has access to two mobile flak platforms: the Sdkfz 7/2, and Flak Trains.  Both units are only allowed on the low-altitude day map, and act as a rapid response as they can quickly move to new defensive positions as needed.  The Sdkfz 7/2 fires the same powerful ammunition as the light flak guns above, and therefore is only useful against targets on the low-altitude map.  The Flak Train fires heavier flak bursts that can reach the high-altitude map and night map, but it can only move on rail track and urban terrain.  It is meant to guard freight trains.

--Heavy Flak--
The 88mm Flak Battery and 3.7-inch Flak are heavy-caliber weapons designed to hurl high explosive projectiles into the heavens.  Each can fire up to four flak bursts per turn in addition to any reactive fire that they trigger on the defensive.  They are also the least expensive flak units to build, but this is because they move very slowly and can only fire from installation terrain as described above, and from within cities.  Any well-rounded defense will feature a healthy amount of these units.

@@Radar
Over the Reich has three very large maps, and many aircraft are invisible until they attack.  This can make for a frustrating experience if you do not invest in radar installations.  Radar installations can be used individually, or en masse.

To use them individually, select one and press ‘k.’  The units’ movement point will be exhausted and a text box will appear that explains if enemy aircraft were, or were not detected.  If aircraft are detected, yellow icons will appear on the screen.  Radar can be used on any type of terrain, but has a movement point of 1, though they can paradrop (deploy) five spaces to aid initial set up.

To fire all radar installations at once, select one and press 'backspace.'  This will provide a text box that asks if you would like to use all radar sets at once.  Beware, if you select 'yes,' you will not be able to move any radar sets that turn.

Radar of the time wasn’t necessarily the most precise, and it is also prone to error in Over the Reich.  When a radar user “sweeps” a tile containing units, a detection “error number” is calculated.  Through an incredible amount of Prof. Garfield wizardry behind the scenes (search for “Radar Detectability Details” in the events.lua for an in-depth explanation), a few different outcomes are possible:

1. A radar marker could be placed on the tile containing the enemy aircraft;
2. A radar marker could be placed somewhere on the 3x3 diamond that surrounds the tile containing the enemy aircraft;
3. A radar marker could be placed somewhere on the 5x5 diamond that surrounds the tile containing the enemy aircraft; or
4. No radar marker could be placed at all, and a false negative could be reported.

There are several factors that govern this, but there is basically an “arms race” in the scenario between radar detection efforts and electronic counter measures.  Generally speaking, more advanced radar installations and radar-equipped night fighter aircraft have a better chance of detecting obsolete bombers than new ones.  Researching “Advanced Radar I” and “Advanced Radar II” as well as the three “Nightfighters” technologies also increases the prowess of your radar operators.  If one side makes a heavy investment in radar and night fighter aircraft than the other, they will tend to have the advantage.  

EXAMPLE: If the Germans have Nightfighters I and the Allies don’t, then the Germans will get a bonus to spotting Stirling bombers.  The Allies can negate this bonus in one of two ways: research Nightfighters I themselves, or build Halifax bombers instead.  

The Allies can also attempt to thwart German radar detection through subterfuge.  After researching the “Window” technology, the Allies can build a Pathfinder unit.  This special aircraft deploys aluminum foil strips by pressing “k,” which then produce a radar return.

@@The Battle of the Atlantic
Britain, being an island nation, is totally reliant on imports from her vast Empire.  Through the course of two world wars, Germany tried to severe these ties.  Over the Reich starts in 1942, when the Battle of the Atlantic was still very much in doubt, and the struggle is featured prominently in the scenario, but a bit abstractly so as to avoid players spending more time than necessary moving ships around in a scenario about the air war.

Naval units are relatively limited in type and amount.  The Allies have access to a convoy unit that can attack and move several spaces.  Their objective should be to move these units safely to English ports.  Once there, the player should press 'k' while the convoy is selected.  This will provide the Allied player with freight trains and some fuel (gold).  

The Germans have U-Boat wolfpacks which are meant to destroy these convoys, or at least heavily damage them, before they reach port.  Damaging a convoy will reduce its movement points, thus delaying the Allied benefit from the unit.

The Luftwaffe and Allied Air Forces also play a role.  In addition to directly attacking convoys and wolfpacks, German and Allied bombers can target military ports of the opposing nation.  Allied convoys require a military port to unload their goods, so these are worthwhile targets for the Germans.  German military ports spawn u-boat reinforcements and also play a role in how many Allied convoys spawn each turn.  Destroying them will reduce the places u-boats can spawn, and will increase the number of convoys that the Allies receive.

Every time a u-boat is destroyed, it will respawn in a German military port, if one is available.  It will first search for a port on the Atlantic coast of France.  If this is not possible, it will then spawn in a military port in Germany proper.  Obviously, it is in the German's best interest to keep several military ports functional in France, and in the Allies' best interest to destroy them. 

Each side also receives a special naval bomber.  The German Fw200 Condor and the Allied Sunderland aircraft are meant to range far and wide throughout the oceans looking for prey.  Additionally the Sunderland reactively attacks to any u-boats that attempt to attack a convoy.


@@Occupied Europe
As long as the Germans maintain a strong military presence in Occupied France, they will receive free freight trains there each turn.  There is a grey line drawn on the map, and German battlegroups and depleted battlegroups must be stationed west of it to allow more freight train reinforcements to spawn.  These will spawn randomly which will prevent the Allies from destroying them before they can be used.


@@Vengeance Weapons
Later in the game, Germany has the opportunity to develop V1 buzz bombs and V2 rockets that they can hurl against British population centers.  Each needs to be launched by their respective launch site unit, which must be situated on an installation terrain to fire.  These vengeance weapons are designed to turn the tide of the war, though they may instead prove to be a massive waste of resources.

@@The Rail Network
Anyone who has watched old gun cam footage has seen first-hand that locomotives were a major target of the Allied air forces.  Over the Reich aims to simulate this.  The transportation network of both sides is critical to the production of aircraft and defense of your forces.  Maintaining a functioning rail network will also allow you to strategically redeploy ground forces across the continent in a single turn (see “M. Military Rail Transportation Network” below).

Airfields are the only types of cities that can build aircraft, yet tend to have limited access to production tiles and therefore rely on population centers or events to provide “Freight Trains” that can be moved into the airfield and disbanded to create the aircraft quicker.  

Freight Trains cannot move on grassland or forest terrain and must instead move along “rail track” to reach their destinations.  They can also move through urban terrain, and of course can move directly onto airfields and cities.

Throughout the map you will see a sprinkling of icons called “Switchyards” (they look like a tower) – these are “teleporters” that allow Freight Trains to cross over to the night map so as to help build up your night fighter or bomber command forces.

The “Railyard” unit on the high-altitude day map can be attacked which will change the tile on the night and low-altitude day map to “bombed RR” which Freight Trains cannot enter.  This is also the tile containing the switchyard icon, so until you rebuild that improvement, you won’t be able to use that section of railroad or send supplies to your night forces via that path.

VERY IMPORTANT: It is suggested that you strive to build airfields on locations with access to the rail network.  You will note that we’ve placed several “railroads to nowhere” throughout the map to help accommodate this and give you options as to where you build your cities.  If you don’t build your cities next to rail track, there’s a good chance you aren’t going to be able to move Freight Trains from the population centers to the airfield! Then again, a few out-of-the-way bases would make a great place to hide your jet forces from roaming enemy fighter sweeps…

--Military Rail Transportation Network--

To decrease each turn’s playtime, we have instituted a “strategic redeployment” military rail transportation system for ground units.  When a ground unit is activated in a city that contains a railyard, the player can press “u” and will receive a pop-up box with several destination cities for the ground unit.  These cities must be connected by terrain that a freight train can pass, and both cities must have railyards, and each city will have an associated fuel cost next to it for moving the unit rapidly.  Movements across the continent will be significantly more expensive than short trips.  Just like airlifts in the base game, only one unit may transport to or from a city with a railyard each turn.  

Note: ground units positioned on a rail track terrain between two cities will prevent a unit from using the military rail transportation network to strategically redeploy.



@@Reconnaissance Flights
Reconnaissance missions are important to undertake prior to risking precious aircraft on bombing runs that might find empty fields.  The Ju-188 (PR) and Mosquito (PR) are invisible until attack and carry a camera unit (diplomat) that can be called up by pressing, “k.” The only diplomat function allowed is to investigate cities, but this will allow you to determine what cities have what improvements, and where your opponent’s forces are deployed.

NOTE: Because the camera is a diplomat, it must be a ground unit.  Thus, pressing “k” while over water will not produce any unit.


@@The Italian Theatre and Russian Front
The Allies have two “special” cities on the map.  One represents the Italian Theatre and the other represents the Russian Front.  As the Allies gather “points,” they will unlock these theatres and units may be built from them.  It takes 250 points to unlock the Italian Theatre and 1,500 points to unlock the Russian Front.  Thus, as the campaign progresses, Germany will be stretched more and more, as attacks will come from multiple directions.

VERY IMPORTANT: There are no “shuttle missions” in this scenario.  You cannot land 8th Air Force or RAF units in Italy or the Russian Front, or vice versa.  If you attempt to do this, they will be deleted.


@@Research Boosts
There are two units in this game that act as trade units: “Prototypes I” and “Prototypes II.”  They can only be built in cities that have aircraft factories.  Unlike the base game, they do not provide a cash bonus when a trade route is established, but they do provide a science boost.  Both players can take advantage of these, but as Germany starts with considerably more aircraft factories and is also a Republic, the thought is that they will likely benefit more.

@@Formation Flying
Prof. Garfield spent a considerable amount of time making Over the Reich as easy to play as possible, and one of the “quality of life” issues that he addressed was the fact that in mid- to late-game, the Allies often can have 100s of air units that may all be heading to the same general area.  His solution was to add a “formation flying” script.

Press '4' (above letter keys) to center a formation around the active unit, which will be called the formation 'leader'. A dialog box will appear, letting you choose how big the formation is. 

The formation will consist of all units with same domain as the leader within the number of squares chosen when the formation was created. Units with orders (e.g. sleep, fortify) will not join the formation. Air units in cities/airbases will not be recruited.

Units in the formation will attempt to perform the same movement as the leader. If they can't, they drop out of the formation. Formation units will not attempt to enter an enemy city (and air units won't enter a friendly city either), nor will they attack enemy units in the field or generate munitions.

Ground and sea units will drop out of the formation when they have 0 movement left, air units will drop out when they have 1 movement point left. If a unit drops out of a formation, it will have its remaining movement left, unless it is a ground unit that failed to enter a square because it didn't have enough movement points left (it will try to enter, with probability movementRemaining/terrainMoveCost).

Activating a new unit will break up the formation (the game will not remember the formation when the leader is re-selected). The formation can also be broken up by pressing '4'.

@@Upgrading Veteran Units
As air units have 0 attack and fire a separate “munition” unit, veteran units are at a premium in this scenario, so we wanted to give you the option of swapping veteran aircrews into more advanced aircraft.  This also is more realistic, as experienced fighter units would tend to get new aircraft while rookies would often start in older equipment.

To swap out airframes for your veterans, you need to meet a few requirements:

1. You must have two models of the same general aircraft type (for example, two British fighters, or two American heavy bombers) in the same airfield.
2. Both units must have full health and movement points.

Assuming both are true, pressing “3” will cause a text box to appear, allowing you to select which aircraft to assign the experienced crew.

NOTE: Luftwaffe heavy fighters (such as the Me110) can swap with night fighters (such as the Ju88C) but cannot swap veterans with Luftwaffe day fighters.

@@Air-Protected Stacks Revisited 
Because bombs cannot attack air units, we have used lua to remove the ability to protect target units (such as industry targets or fuel refineries) by stacking aircraft on top of them.  

Generating a munition will check all adjacent squares for air protected strategic targets (i.e. a square with both an air unit and a strategic target). Where they exist, the event will first try to place the aircraft on an adjacent empty square. If none exists, it will try to place the aircraft on an adjacent friendly square without a strategic target (it will not try to find the square with the fewest units or anything like that). If no such square can be found, the aircraft will be placed on a strategic target not adjacent to the munition generating unit. If there is still no place to put the unit, it will be left where it is.

NOTE: This does not stop you or your enemy from creating a “wall” next to the unit to prevent its attack, but considerably more resources will need to be invested to prevent attacks in this manner.  

@@The Newspaper
Pressing “2” will call up a “newspaper” function wherein you can read important messages from prior turns.  This is useful for remembering what your special target objectives are without having to consult Appendix D of the readme.

@@Historic Missions
This scenario features several historic missions (such as “Operation Gommorrah”).  Though these missions are technically optional, you will receive a benefit to successfully completing them, and your opponent will receive a reward if you fail to accomplish the objectives.  Please consult Appendix D of the readme for the list of potential Historic Missions.

@@Increasing Weapons Effectiveness
All air units tend to become better defensively as better models are researched (for example, an Me109K4 is a better defensive unit than an Me109G6 that you start the game with).  When coupled with the fact that no air units have an attack value, and instead fire one of three units as munitions, this means that those munitions become less effective over time.  The solution is to research Tactics I, II, and III as these will increase the effectiveness of fighter aircraft munitions by +1 per technology.  This effect is cumulative.

@@Wilde Sau
All German aircraft can move at will between the day and night maps once the Wilde Sau technology has been researched.  This does not require the construction of any improvement.  Pressing the “u” key will automatically move the aircraft to the other map.  

Note: This will also remove all of its movement points as it takes time to transition aircraft back and forth between day and night fighter units.  Unlike the transporter improvement, you can, however, move as many units in a city as you would like in one turn.

@@Weather
One of the most exciting features of Over the Reich is that it features a weather system.  Cloud systems will form, dissipate, and move turn from turn.  You as the player have no control over this, but you should be aware of it.  Units gain a defensive advantage when in cloud cover.  Reactive attacks from fighters are half as effective if they’re in the clouds.  Bombers reactive attacks don’t incur a penalty.  Flak’s reactive attack is halved until the Proximity fuses technology is researched. 

@@Diverted Resources
Diverted fuel takes the place of corruption in this scenario.  As Germany is fighting a multi-front war, considerable fuel resources are diverted from home defense and sent to other theatres.  The Allies also face some diverted fuel, but not as much as Germany because they have agreed on a "Germany First" policy.  Building quartermasters will alleviate some of this issue.

@@The Flying Fortress
The two variants of the B-17 “Flying Fortress” in this scenario are exceptionally difficult to kill, because destroying one replaces it with a “damaged bomber” unit in its place.  This unit cannot attack but can limp home to be disbanded into a brand-new bomber the next turn.  These units are so powerful because they are meant to make raids deep into German territory, often without escort.


@This must be here to terminate search!!!

